From time immemorial a nation chants, BUT WE KNOW  your Story Already. The Bells Peal every WHere. CHurCH BeLLS CALLING THe FAITHFuL To THe TABerNACLe WHere THe GATeS oF HeAVeN  WILL oPeN, BuT NoT For THe WICked. CALLING INNoCeNT LITTLe BLACk GIrLS FroM A dISTANT CoMMuNITY WHere THe WHITe doVe BeArING AN oLIVe BrANCH NeVer LANdS. LITTLe GIrLS WHo CoMe BACk HoMe AFTer CHurCH oN SuNdAY, WHo Look ArouNd THeMSeLVeS AT THe HuMAN FALLouT ANd ANNouNCe MATTer-oF- FACTLY, ArMAGEDDON BEGiNS hErE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The  ancestral  serpent,  a  creature  larger  than  storm  clouds,  came down from the stars, laden with its own creative enormity. It moved graciously  –  if  you  had  been  watching  with  the  eyes  of  a  bird hovering  in  the  sky  far  above  the  ground.  Looking  down  at  the serpent’s  wet  body,  glistening  from  the  ancient  sunlight,  long before  man  was  a  creature  who  could  contemplate  the  next moment in time. It came down those billions of years ago, to crawl on  its  heavy  belly,  all  around  the  wet  clay  soils  in  the  Gulf  of Carpentaria. Picture the creative serpent, scoring deep into – scouring down through – the slippery underground of the mudflats, leaving in its wake  the  thunder  of  tunnels  collapsing  to  form  deep  sunken valleys. The sea water following in the serpent’s wake, swarming in a frenzy of tidal waves, soon changed colour from ocean blue to the yellow  of  mud.  The  water  filled  the  swirling  tracks  to  form  the mighty  bending  rivers  spread  across  the  vast  plains  of  the  Gulf country. The serpent travelled over the marine plains, over the salt flats,  through  the  salt  dunes,  past  the  mangrove  forests  and crawled inland. Then it went back to the sea. And it came out at another  spot  along  the  coastline  and  crawled  inland  and  back again.  When  it  finished  creating  the  many  rivers  in  its  wake,  it created one last river, no larger or smaller than the others, a river which offers no apologies for its discontent with people who do not know  it.  This  is  where  the  giant  serpent  continues  to  live  deep down  under  the  ground  in  a  vast  network  of  limestone  aquifers. They  say  its  being  is  porous;  it  permeates  everything.  It  is  all around in the atmosphere and is attached to the lives of the river people like skin. This tidal river snake of flowing mud takes in breaths of a size that  is  difficult  to  comprehend.  Imagine  the  serpent’s  breathing rhythms as the tide flows inland, edging towards the spring waters nestled  deeply  in  the  gorges  of  an  ancient  limestone  plateau covered  with  rattling  grasses  dried  yellow  from  the  prevailing winds.  Then  with  the  outward  breath,  the  tide  turns  and  the serpent flows back to its own circulating mass of shallow waters in the giant water basin in a crook of the mainland whose sides separate it from the open sea. To catch this breath in the river you need the patience of one who can spend days doing nothing. If you wait under the rivergum where those up-to-no-good Mission-bred kids accidentally hanged Cry-baby  Sally, the tip of the dead branch points to where you will see how the serpent’s breath fights its way through in a tunnel of wind, creating ripples that shimmer silver, similar to the scales of a small,  nocturnal  serpent,  thrashing  in  anger  whenever  the  light hits its slippery translucent body, making it writhe and wrench to escape back into its natural environment of darkness. The  inside knowledge about this river and coastal region is the Aboriginal Law handed down through the ages since time began. otherwise,  how  would  one  know  where  to  look  for  the  hidden underwater courses in the vast flooding mud plains, full of serpents and fish in the monsoon season? Can someone who did not grow up in a place that is sometimes under water, sometimes bone-dry, know when the trade winds blowing off the southern and northern hemispheres will merge in summer? k now the moment of climatic change  better  than  they  know  themselves?  Who  fishes  in  the yellow-coloured monsoonal runoff from the drainages, with sheets of  deep  water  pouring  into  the  wide  rivers  swollen  over  their banks,  filling  vast  plains  with  floodwaters?  The  cyclones  linger and  regroup,  the  rain  never  stops  pouring,  but  the  fat  fish  are abundant. It takes  a  particular  kind  of  knowledge  to  go  with  the  river, whatever its mood. It is about there being no difference between you  and  the  movement  of  water  as  it  seasonally  shifts  its  tracks according to its own mood. A river that spurns human endeavour in one dramatic gesture, jilting a lover who has never really been known, as it did to the frontier town built on its banks in the hectic heyday of colonial vigour. A town intended to serve as a port for the shipping trade for the hinterland of Northern Australia. In one moment, during a Wet season early in the last century, the town lost its harbour waters when the river simply decided to change  course,  to  bypass  it  by  several  kilometres.  Just  like  that. Now the waterless port survives with more or less nothing to do. Its citizens continue to engage in a dialogue with themselves passed down the generations, on why the town should continue to exist. They stayed on to safeguard the northern coastline from invasion by the Yellow Peril. A dreadful vision, a long yellow streak marching behind  an  arrowhead  pointing  straight  for  the  little  town  of desperance. eventually the heat subsided. When the Yellow Peril did  not  invade,  everyone  had  a  good  look  around  and  found  a more contemporary reason for existence. It meant the town still had  to  be  vigilant. duty  did  not  fall  on  one  or  two;  duty  was everybody’s business. To keep a good eye out for whenever the moment presented itself, to give voice to a testimonial far beyond personal experience – to comment on the state of their blacks. To do so was regarded as an economic contribution to State rights, then, as an afterthought, to maintaining the decent society of the nation as a whole. Normal Phantom was an old tribal man, who lived all of his life in the dense Pricklebush scrub on the edge of town. He lived amidst thickets of closely-growing slender plants with barely anything for leaves, that never gave an ant an inch of shelter under a thousand thorny  branches.  This  foreign  infestation  on  the  edge  of desperance grew out of an era long before anyone in the Phantom family  could  remember.  They  had  lived  in  a  human  dumpingground next to the town tip since the day Normal Phantom was born.  All  choked  up,  living  piled  up  together  in  trash  humpies made  of  tin,  cloth,  and  plastic  too,  salvaged  from  the  rubbish dump.  The  descendants  of  the  pioneer  families,  who  claimed ownership of the town, said the Aboriginal was really not part of the town  at  all .  Sure,  they  worked  the  dunny  cart  in  the  old  days, carted the rubbish and swept the street. Furthermore , they said, the Aboriginal was dumped here by the pastoralists, because they refused to pay the  blackfella  equal  wages,  even  when  it  came  in right  on  the  edge  of some  body  else’s  town,  didn’t  they? dumped  the  lot  of  them  without any sign of lock, stock or barrel. No, the  Pricklebush  was  from  the  time  before  the  motor  car, when goods and chattels came up by camel train until Abdul and Abdullah,  the  old  Afghan  brothers,  disappeared  along  the  track called the ‘lifeline’, connecting north to south. After much time had passed  the  jokes  came  about  Afghans  being shifty  dogs , dodgy  dogs , murdering dogs and unreliable . When the cupboards turned bare, the town talk finally turned to the realisation that very likely the camel men  were  never  coming  back  –  then  everyone  in  town  assumed they had died. A few of the Christian-minded, trying to capitalise on the gross lack of decency in town, sniffed, Well! That ought to teach you now, won’t it? But no one else thought so, because by then the grog and the tucker was being freighted up by mail truck, which everyone thought was a more convenient method of road transport by any stretch of the imagination. one  cloud-covered  night,  the  camels  finally  turned  up  in desperance,  jingling  and  a-jangling,  their  foreign  bells  swaying around  their  necks,  vespers  on  such  a  still  night.  The  residents woke  up  in  childlike  fright,  sitting  straight  up  in  their  beds,  eyes wide open like zombies, seeing dark figures moving in their pitchblack bedroom, same time reckoning it was ghosts with an Afghan smell,  true  God,  just  came  straight  in,  levitating,  taking  over, helping themselves, walking around people’s homes with no mind youse ,  not  one  shred  of  good  manners  whatsoever.  Couldn’t  even knock on the door first before coming into someone’s house. That was the trouble with new Australians the town claimed: Even dead ones  had  no  manners . unnaturalised. really  un-Australian. you shoulda sent out a search party .  What a relief it was for dawn to come and everyone could see for themselves it was just poor old Abdul’s and Abdullah’s camels. over the following days no one thought to capture the animals to retrieve the rotting pack saddles. The townsfolk had a deeply felt aversion  to  touching  the  belongings  of  dark-skinned  foreigners  – or their animals. So, the camels just wandered around at their own will, covered with sores from the rotting packs of foodstuff: flour, sugar, grain growing sprouts that had died, still strapped over and hanging off their backs until something had to be done. The poor beasts  were  officially  rounded  up.  The  screaming,  uncooperative animals  didn’t  comprehend english,  or  barbarism  either.  After being  hounded  for  several  hours  by  their  pursuers  on  foot  and horseback,  and  stoned  and  whipped,  the  camels  were  eventually moved  out  over  the  claypans  and  shot.  In  the  archival  records written  with  a  thick  nib  by  a  heavy-handed  municipal  clerk  it  is recorded,  Camels removed . The first entry of work completed by the Town’s Municipal Council. In the old camel-drivers’ camps the seeds of mimosa embedded in camel dung sprouted their hard little shoots in the Wet season. Thousands  of  seeds  spread  along  every  track  and  gully,  flooding with sheetwater from the rain to regenerate in shallow mud pools. The  shoots  sent  down  their  fat  roots  to  take  a  steely  grip  on  the claypans, holding the land together in a mirage that looked like it might last forever without water. In this mirage the cattle properties prospered  on  traditional  lands  taken  but  never  ceded.  Today, herds  of  Brahman-cross  cattle  leave  their  tracks  crisscrossing  the landscape  in  the  dry  season,  as  they  search  for  stubbly  patches  of bluegrass and grind the top layers of soil to powdered bulldust. The Pricklebush mob say that Normal Phantom could grab hold of the  river  in  his  mind  and  live  with  it  as  his  father’s  fathers  did before him. His ancestors were the river people, who were living with  the  river  from  before  time  began.  Normal  was  like  ebbing water, he came and went on the flowing waters of the river right out to the sea. He stayed away on the water as long as he pleased. He  knew  fish,  and  was  on  friendly  terms  with  gropers,  the  giant codfish of the Gulf sea, that swam in schools of fifty or more, on the move right up the river following his boat in for company. The old people  say  the  groper  lives  for  hundreds  of  years  and  maybe Normal  would  too.  When  he  talked  about  the  stars,  they  said  he knew  as  much  about  the  sky  as  he  did  about  water.  The  prickly bush mob said he had always chased the constellations: We watched him  as  a  little  boy  running  off  into  the  night  trying  to  catch  stars .  They were certain he knew the secret of getting there. They thought he must go right up to the stars in the company of groper fish when it stormed at sea, when the sea and the sky became one, because, other  wise, how could he have come back? ‘How you do that?’ was the question everyone asked. ‘ The  water  doesn’t  worry  me,’  Normal  Phantom  answered simply, although he knew that when his mind went for a walk, his body followed. everyone  in desperance  was  used  to  the  sight  of  Normal’s jeep  driving  north  to  meet  the  river’s  edge.  It  was  the  only vehicle he had ever owned. Always, the small tinnie boat, full of dints, a stray bullet hole or two, strapped onto the roof. A vessel purchased  with  cross-country  road  transport  in  mind,  much more than water safety. They say he knew these deep muddy waters better than the big salties:  crocs  that  got  tangled  up  in  the  nets  in  the  middle  of  the night. Glassy-eyed monsters that came over the side of his tiny craft looking  for  action  with  the  big  river  man.  Jaws  charging  for  a winner-takes-all  kind  of  fight  in  the  swamping  boat,  snapping  in full  flight,  water  splashing  up  into  a  storm  with  the  swishing, thrash,  thrash,  thrashing  of  an  angry  tail  against  the  side  of  the boat.  People  like  to  remember  Normal  saying  in  melancholy fashion (faking a thoroughly modern Americanised impersonation of a Presidential Captain Hook): those snapping jaws meant diddly squat to him. Meanwhile, he moved like a hopping hare, fumbling for what seemed like ages to find the gun. Normal ended hundreds of lives of prehistoric living fossils this way, with his gun pointing all over the place in a turmoil of water and thick leather crankiness, until he made a direct hit between the eyes of the reptile caught in an instant of moonlight. In this otherwise quietly living population of about three hundred people, no living soul remembered what the port had looked like before.  No  picture  could  be  put  on  display  in  a  showcase  at  the museum of scarce memorabilia, because no one at the time of the heyday thought it was worthwhile to take a photo. But everybody knew that this was Normal’s river. one day, someone in town, whose name is not worth a mention, was languishing around in a laconic stupor following the months of heatwave in the Wet season build-up, waiting for the rain to come. Lying flat-out like a corpse on the bare linoleum floor in the hallway of a house exactly like the one next door. Capturing in a long sigh  of  appreciation  the  northern  sea  breezes  that  came  waltzing straight  over  twenty-five  kilometres  of  mudflats,  whistling  their arrival through the front door while, on the way out, slamming the back  door  open  and  shut.  All  of  a  sudden  this  someone  of  no consequence thought of changing the name of the river to Normal. And, in a town where change never came easy, it came to be. There  was  a  celebration  by  the  local  Shire  Council.  The occasion was the anniversary of the port’s first one hundred years. It  coincided  with  a  spate  of  unusual  happenings  during  a  shortlived era of Aboriginal domination of the Council. h armless coercing of the natives, the social planners hummed, anxious to make deals happen for the impending mining boom. Meaningful coexistence could now accommodate almost any request whatsoever, including changing  a  river’s  name  to  Normal. during  this  honeymoon period,  those  Aboriginal  people  who  took  the  plunge  to  be councillors, wisely used their time in public office to pursue scraps of  personal  gain  for  their  own  families  living  amidst  the  muck  of third-world poverty. All this  was  part  and  parcel  of  the  excitement  of desperance when the first multinational mining company came into the region. Numerous short-lived profiteering schemes were concocted for the locals, in order to serve the big company’s own interests as they set about  pillaging  the  region’s  treasure  trove:  the  publicly  touted curve of an underground range embedded with minerals. The elaborate  white  linen  ceremony,  paid  for  by  the  mining company,  attracted  southern  politicians  who  flew  in  for  the  day. Most of them were known by the local dignitaries as a bunch of flyby-nighters. And what’s more, as they rolled out the welcome smile, some locals whispered unmentionable insults behind the backs of their very important visitors. other locals who liked the sound of their own voices attacked the politicians straight out with a diatribe of insults. Yelling out, the crowd picked up bits wafting in the wind gusts: youse are always cowering down on the ground . Are youse the runt of the Australian political litter or something? y ah! falling over yaselves to any foreign investor flocking up the steps of Parliament, knocking on the big door, and smelling like money . The  politicians  and  mining  executives  mingled  uncomfortably with  the  crowd,  then  pushed  themselves  up  against  the  old  hero Normal for a photo opportunity, and got snapped by members of the  media  circus  who  had  jockeyed  for  free  rides  on  the  official executive jets. Then everything got ruined by a normal sort of dust storm thundering in from the south. A thick wall of red dust mingled with all manner of crunched vegetation and plastic shopping bags gathered up in its path, damaging the cut sandwiches when it came through.  The  fidget-prone  adults  panicked,  running  for  cover along with their red and green cordial-stained screaming children. Then came a violent electrical storm when the rain ruined the day anyway – as the town’s sceptics said it would. A taut occasion, despite  these  dramatic  interventions;  enough  time  for  the  now disposed-of  State  Premier  to  complete  the  ceremony  of  officially changing  the  name  of  the  river  from  that  of  a  long  deceased Imperial Queen, to ‘Normal’s river’. Traditional people gathered up for the event mumbled, Ngabarn,  Ngabarn,  Mandagi , and so did Normal in a very loud and sour-sounding voice over the loudspeaker in his extremely short thankyou address, although those who knew a fruit salad full of abuse in the local languages knew he was not saying Thank  you!  Thank  you!   and  belly-laughed  themselves  silly because the river only had one name from the beginning of time. It was called Wangala . It was a funny thing about the river. Anybody and everybody thought  they  might  ride  this  river  like  some  legendary  buckjumping wild horse called diesel or Gidgee or Mulga. People were always travelling up to the northern coastline over the rough roads of the Gulf on long weekends. They’d haul up and launch straight over  the  side  into  the  yellow  river:  flash  fishing  boats  with  sixties country  and  western  names,  like Donna , Stella   and   Trixie .  Brightcoloured  boats,  powered  by  engines  of  many  horsepowers, bought  with  top  dollar  gained  from  doing  stretch  shifts  two kilometres  down  underground,  hauling  up  rich  ores  scraped from the mother load embedded in sequences of rock that looked like the growth rings of a powerful, ancient being. And on the water they would cast a line here, a line there, over the sides with state of the art fishing tackle, but no knowledge of the  way  of  the  river.  Nothing  was  thought  about  it.  There  was  a considerable number of people living in the region now, with the great influx of mine workers who had nothing to do on their days off.  More  new  mines  became  established  in  the  region  with  little regard to anyone’s say-so. After the mining stopped, neither Normal Phantom and his family, nor his family’s relations, past or present, rated a mention in the official  version  of  the  region’s  history.  There  was  no  tangible evidence  of  their  existence. even  in uncle  Micky’s  collection  of bullet cartridges. Micky had lived with a metal detector for God knows how long. He said he had a fever which drove him on because he would never know when he picked up the last piece of evidence – all of those forty-fours, thirty thirtys, three-o-threes, twelve gauges – all kinds of cartridges used in the massacre of the local tribes. He had maps, names of witnesses, details, the lot. A walking encyclopaedia. Now his voice lives on in the great archive of cassettes which he left for the war trials he predicted would happen one day. But no tourists go  to  Micky’s  museum.  Maybe  because  it  was  built  in  the  wrong spot. That’s fighting for you. Fighting, fighting all the time for a bit of land and a little bit of recognition. All  the  old  mines,  old  mining  equipment,  old  miners,  old miners’ huts, skeletons of miners in the cupboard, anything to do with mining was packaged in a mishmash of nothing words and marketed on gloss as the ultimate of local tourist attractions. The shiny  covers  of  these  tourist  brochures  celebrating  selected historical  sites  and  museums  ought  to  grab  you  from  across  the room at airports, hotels and motels, or from the rack of any tourist or  travel  centre  selling  the  highlights  of  mining.  You  can’t  even hide the stuff because of its iridescence. But this was not Vaudeville. Wars were fought here. If you had your  patch  destroyed  you’d  be  screaming  too.  The  serpent’s covenant permeates everything, even the little black girls with hair combed back off their faces and bobby-pinned neatly for church, listening  quietly  to  the  nation  that  claims  to  know  everything except the exact date its world will end. Then, almost whispering, they shyly ask if the weather has been forecast correctly today. If you are someone who visits old cemeteries, wait awhile if you visit the water people. The old Gulf country men and women who took  our  besieged  memories  to  the  grave  might  just  climb  out  of the mud and tell you the real story of what happened here. ONe eVeNING IN THe drIeST GrASSeS IN THe WorLd, A CHILd WHo WAS No STrANGer To Her PeoPLe, ASked IF ANYoNe CouLd FINd HoPe. THe PeoPLe oF PArABLe ANd ProPHeCY PoNdered WHAT WAS HoPeLeSS ANd FINALLY deCLAred THeY No LoNGer kNeW WHAT HoPe WAS. THe CLoCkS, TICk-A-TY ToCk, Looked AS  THouGH THeY MIGHT ruN ouT oF TIMe. LuCkILY, THe GHoSTS IN THe MeMorIeS oF THe oLd FoLk Were LISTeNING, ANd SAId ANYoNe CAN FINd Hope IN THe STorIeS: THe BIG STorIeS ANd THe LITTLe  oNeS IN BeTWeeN. So. Normal Phantom turned away from the glory of the storm clouds lacing the sea, to look in the eye, grab by the horns, all the greycoloured  calamities  of  a  man’s  life.  Behold  the  sight  of  welcome home,  embedded  in  the  never-ending  rattling  corrugated-iron shanty  fortress,  built  from  the  sprinklings  of  holy  water,  charms, spirits,  lures  acquired  from  packets  of  hair  dye,  and  discarded materials pinched from the rubbish dump across the road. This was  Number o ne  house.  Normal  Phantom’s  house  was the first blackfella place built on the edge of desperance, before the two warring nations, one with, one without land, ended up circling the whole town. The structure of the house was a tribute to far-off monuments representing noteworthy moments of history. His marriage to Angel d ay had climbed the crest of a mountain of  misgiving,  and,  ‘only  when  she  had  gone’,  was  he  able  to understand  that  the  woman  had  always  been  a  hornet’s  nest waiting to be disturbed. After three decades of shared life, such a single, independent thought was a total revelation to a big man like Normal Phantom. The house  was  a  hornet’s  nest,  like  Angel day,  and  Normal spoke of it as if it were her. The house had been inadvertently built on the top of the nest of a snake spirit. He always blamed her for that. From day one, he knew and always said , ‘This house makes my  bones ache . ’ He told her how he felt something was wrong, how he  could  feel  something  coming  from  under  the  ground  into  his bones. He only spoke to deaf ears. But he knew whenever he left the  house,  he  would  instantly  feel  as  though  he  had  unshackled himself  from  the  weight  of  a  sack  strapped  over  his  back.  Then, when  he  came  back,  he  felt  as  though  he  had  been  hypnotised into thinking that he would never be able to move away from its field of gravitation again, even if he willed himself from it. Perhaps some day he would be stuck forever. So what? He should have told someone who cared. He knew  such  a  phenomenon  existed,  because  each  time  he left, it was harder to pull himself away from the house. ‘Move,’ he told her, but if she had heard anything he said, she gave her usual response to the movement of his lips and in her flattest voice said, ‘No way.’ ‘I was born near lilies so I must see lilies,’ she once told him, calmly pouting towards the waterlilies growing in the swamp at the back,  and  once  that  happened,  not  even  a  grappling  pick  would have plied another word about the matter from her own sweet lips. To  be  fair,  Angel day  had  looked  around  for  days  before choosing what she called  ‘her spot’, if anyone could be so blatantly shameless to go around thinking they were so high and mighty, to just pluck out a spot for themselves in the bush and say, ‘This is mine.’ Well! our Angel did that and got away with it. The spot she chose was amidst a grove of prickly pear thickets, right next to the mosquito-swarming swamp. She said she chose it because it was a private place not seen from the road. Afterwards, still all hot and bothered  from  searching  up  and  down  the  countryside  for  her house site, she parked herself. The  first  six  children  born  had  sat  beside  her  under  the shade  of  a  snappy  gum  until  she  erected  a  more  permanent shade with two blankets. This was all she owned, but it was good enough.  She  told  Norm,  when  he  returned  from  the  sea  next time  and  found  her  there,  that  she  would  not  move  again.  He retaliated by not speaking to her for days. While those two fought out their differences, the whole family lived their daily lives under the blankets, six months of cold winds, then heat, followed by rain blowing  left,  right  and  centre  down  on  top  of  them,  again  and again,  until? until  there  was  peace.  Norm  did  nothing,  not  a single  thing,  to  help  her  to  build  a  roof  over  their  heads  –  as  if that would stop Angel day from doing what she wanted. He caught bream fish if he felt like it: he did no more, and no less. If there were no fish, he expected her to provide, which she did. The whole of uptown rallied over that poor Aboriginal woman struggling  under  a  tree  with  her  children,  condemning  Normal Phantom. If he thought there was going to be an end of it, he was wrong. She, smarter than a snake, plied enough work out of pity to permeate the pure, undiluted quintessential essence of herself into that ground, much as she used magic to erect a home from scraps. Angel day always claimed the spot where she forced Norm to continue  building  their  house  was  the  best  place  they  had  ever lived,  because  all  she  had  to  do  was  walk  across  the  road  to  the rubbish dump, and there she could get anything her heart desired – for free . She thought the dump was magnificent, as anyone dirt poor would. The way she talked, you would have thought she was a  very  rich  woman,  and  it  was  nothing  for  her  to  walk  back  and forth  to  the  dump  two  dozen  times  a  day  to  cart  back  pieces  of sheet  iron,  jerry  cans,  bits  of  car  bodies,  pieces  of  rope,  logs, plastic,  discarded  curtains  and  old  clothing.  She  got  the  family through  the  Wet  as  dry  as  a  bone. diligently,  she  undertook  the chore of checking for leaks, making alterations, choosing the right bits and pieces from her pile of accumulated junk which she leant, tied or stitched to the original blankets, until she ended up with an igloo made of rubbish. Norm fretted, saying, Blah! Blah! This and that. Saying that he thought his children had disappeared forever in amongst the piles of old clothes stored inside their dark, dank dwelling. Constantly he called them, ‘Come outside,’ so he could see them, lest they were tricked by the lurking snake. She never heard a single word. She was busy with blood on her bare hands from extracting nails from rotted timber. The six little children helped her by sizing the nails, bolts and screws. And months passed by. Norm was still a young man who either wanted to be out at sea fishing,  or  else  riding  wild  horses  on  the  spinifex-covered  high plains, working with the cattle. Away jobs in the stock camps. oh! Those  were  hard  but  fair  days  that  was  the  truth.  Working  with cattle,  grown  men  whipped  the  living  Jesus  out  of  other  grown men  but  who  cared?  He  looked  at  all  this  newfangled  activity  of self-sufficiency  being  built  on  sheer  stubbornness  and  said  to  her his final word, ‘Let’s go back to the river country.’ He loved the sound of the clear waters running through petrified forests hidden for  millions  of  years  beneath  the  gently  calling  sounds  of  fronds dangling  down  from  the  old  palms  and  fruit-giving  date  trees lining the river. But Angel day had crossed the bridge. She had no jolly intention of leaving. Look! Can’t you see the pile of riches she had accumulated? Was all this for nothing? ‘How would I be able to move all of this down there?’ she replied. Goodness! Those were modern days, and Angel day was a very rich  woman,  too  good  now  in  comparison  to  the  years  she  had spent  living,  eating  and  sleeping…where?  in  a  swag? oh!  Those were  the  good  old  days  Norm  dreamed  for.  Her  fortunes  were growing  out  of  hand.  She  now  possessed  dozens  of  Heinz  baked bean tins and pickle bottles full of nails, loose screws and bolts. She became  a  genius  in  the  new  ideas  of  blackfella  advancement. Bureaucratic  people  for  the Aborigine s  department  said  she  had ‘Go’.  She became a prime example of government policies at work and to prove it, they came and took pictures of her with a Pentax camera for a report. The old Pricklebush people said what Angel day had was purely magical,  it  was  true,  but  sorry  to  say,  of  no  benefit  to  anyone. This led them to say privately that she had acquired a disease from making her life out of living in other people’s rubbish. Who knew what kind of lurgies lurked in white trash? The dump was full of disease. And the Pricklebush said, if she had  any sense, she ought to stay right away from the rubbish dump . It was of no benefit to anyone if she had magical powers to make her more like the white people. At  the  same  time,  there  was  no  sense  in  denying  the  truth staring  them  in  the  face  because  there  evidently  was  some:  the great  magnanimity  given  to  Angel day  by  the  haunting  spirits residing in the smelly residue, deep down in the gloomy, slimedripping  serpentine  caverns  of  the  dump.  The  ponderous, thinking people among the Pricklebush jumped to her defence, Who was Normal to say  he wanted to live elsewhere, under a log with a bit of rag, worse than a  dog?  Angel accused him of chucking rubbish in  her  face.  She  said  he  did  not  think  properly.  When  she  told him he made her stomach sick just by thinking she should go and live  like  a  dog  in  the  bush,  he  replied:  ‘You  sure  it  is  not  the snake keeping warm there? Can’t be  anything else.’ She was not listening,  she  was  a  genie  counting  her  nails  like  a  millionaire, drawing the world to her beck and call like a queen, mind you. Poor  old  Normal  Phantom,  he  caught  a  lift  and  took  his  soul down to the river country by himself, and when he returned weeks later,  she  had  one  basic  room  erected.  ‘You  can’t  come  back,’  she told him, unless he helped her. The old people intrigued, buttoned their lips and whispered: ‘She has airs for a woman.’ The stand-off was to last one minute with Norm . ‘Alright then. You won’t see me for  five  years.’  She  was  not  a  complacent  woman,  the  old  people remarked.  His  ultimatum  was  over-the-top,  so  she  claimed.  So  it was final. He walked back up the road, all the children were crying. She ignored the whole scene and continued working on the nails as though he did not exist. Normal Phantom kept his promise. He went to sea and stayed away  for  five  full  years.  When  he  returned,  after  the  storms,  he had  his  own  small  fishing  boat.  He  had  inherited  his  father’s memory of the sea, and he walked straight up to Angel day, and told her in the face that he was prepared to hang around. He said there was too much water under the bridge to have to go around fighting his wife all of the time. Why waste his breath? In any case, the  spot  she  had  chosen  was  now  just  across  from  the  driftwood piles  thrown  from  the  sea.  She  accused  him  of  coming  home smelling  like  a  catfish  but  that  didn’t  stop  child  number  seven being born: kevin. Angel was on her way to the rubbish dump palace where her seagull  sentinels  sat  in  the  thousands  on  dead  foliage,  cardboard boxes,  rusted  iron,  slashed  tyres,  pink  plastic  purses  and  cheap whatnot,  guarding  for  nothing  a  humpteen  amount  of  untold treasure. It  was  Angel day’s  palace,  so  she  thought.  The  other Pricklebush  women  said  she  thought  of  herself  only,  since  that dump belonged to everybody. oh! If that was so. It should be said that sometimes light breezes turned sour as lemons, as they did on that particular day. Back in the bay, where Normal Phantom was working on his boat, was the one place of tranquillity on earth left, where  total  ignorance  reigned.  Those  idly  watching  Normal working, while taking little notice of him, scrubbing or something up  and  down  along  the  side  of  his  sea  vessel,  would  have  been mesmerised by the purity of peace and goodwill that belonged to the simple man out in the warming sun, trouser legs rolled up to the  knees  half  covered  in  tidal  mud.  A  leisurely  job  scraping  the summer-dried  fish  guts  from  his  paint-weathered  boat,  his  head down to the work, wondering about painting the boat some fancy colours  –  capillary  red,  or  a  kingfisher’s  azure  blue,  or  sunflower yellow. oh! The good old days. What a memory. A reminder of the showing-off days when men were men, and the fish were plentiful, and boats never dreamt about the colour of camouflaged grey. Angel walked  on  towards  the  rubbish  dump  away  from  the children left asleep in their beds. She wanted to be alone with the seagulls who waited on guard while others followed, flapping quietly in  her  wake. occasionally,  one  would  flutter  above  her  head  for several moments, emitting small squalls, telling her secrets, reminiscing, reciting  little  prayers  recalled  from  prior  reincarnations, before, and just as suddenly, swinging off into formation again to rendezvous with the flocks following in from behind. After having spent the night roosting in the precinct of low-lying headlands and the  swamp  marshes  of  low  tide,  these  large  groupings  of  birds joined the ones already waiting, noisily parcelling out their prized scavenger lots for the day. The morning  jostling  at  the  tip  grew  more  infectious,  as increasing  numbers  of  birds  squawked  and  screeched  with  their beaks  open  wide  at  one  another,  or  flew  above  in  threatening circles. Angel walked through it all, as if it was nothing. The mist was still heavy, and she went about her business, tearing apart the piles of rubbish delivered to the dump over the weekend. The  steamed contents smelt high. Her followers gladly tore apart  the  rotting  scraps  from  the  dinner  tables  of uptown  – Oh! yum! Fish and chips, steak and chips, sausages and chips . Angel paused for a collection of well-used children’s storybooks, and sat down on the  ground  to  gather  them  up  into  a  pile,  all  of  the  little  picture books, pages flung open halfway through the adventures of Mickey Mouse , donald duck, Peter Pan, Cinderella, Alice in Wonderland. She flicked through the books with her thin childlike fingers. The blue-eyed  gulls  hovering,  watched  with  disdainful  interest,  over her  shoulder.  They  were  just  as  engrossed  as  she  was  with  the fantasy lands created in faraway places, of icy winters, cool forests and the paradise land of the rich people. eventually, she placed the books  carefully  into  the  bottom  of  her  sack  so  they  would  not become  damaged.  She  had  more  to  do.  Ahead  of  her  there  were many mysteries to be discovered in the piles of fat green bags. With the mist lifting, it would soon become too hot. She could already feel the sun piercing down on her head. The humidity was thick  in  the  air.  A  light  frown  crossed  her  face.  The  crease  in between  her  eyebrows  was  deepening  with  the  thought  of  her chaotic life. She moved on, gracefully climbing through a hill of vegetation which she recognised from somewhere in town. She had seen the council  men  putting  a  chainsaw  straight  through  the  overgrown oleander  hedges  that  concealed  the  goings-on  in  the  offices  and houses  belonging  to  the  Town  Council’s  very  important  staff. Truckloads  of  hedge  clippings  headed  to  the  dump  while  under the cooling fans the Town Council debated whether to erect a giant something or other in the middle of town. Could it be the world’s biggest stubby, or the world’s biggest town drunk? The two truths of the matter were abandoned, by their choosing instead to lasso in icons of the sea. Whereas other more fetching images were uttered – Choose the biggest fibreglass barramundi, or the biggest concrete groper imaginable  – some preferred the steel-spiked wild boar celebrating Abilene, or the biggest lead-framed bull – a brown Brahman, or a fantastic Santa Gertrudis bull with a blazing star in the forehead – which would light up the main road like a beacon at night. e ither would distinguish the town . But what about a miner with a pick? It was such a hard choice. Angel d ay had no idea of the debate since no one  spoke  to  her  about  the  issues  of uptown . She  just  climbed through  the  official  vegetation,  still  uptight  with  confidentiality because it gave away no town secrets to her. But they should have asked people like Angel d ay. She often spoke about the absence of God in desperance and the need for him to make his appearance in uptown to redeem the cursed with his light. The branches with olive-green limbs and limp leaves felt cool against  her  skin,  so  Angel day  moved  on  through  the  lot,  just  to reach the pile of green bags underneath. When she established a position where she could balance herself inside the branches, she sat there in the shade, concealed from the rest of the world. one by one she opened the bags, checking to see what was worth taking. All  there  was  were  sheets  of  white  paper  which  she  thought  had probably  come  from  the  Council  office.  She  did  not  read  them because  she  was  not  interested  to  waste  her  time  examining  the rates and whatnots other people owed to uptown. Angel d ay might have been surprised if ‘official’ papers did not intimidate her to the point she could never read them without her heart pounding. even her fingers felt shaky, just to touch officialdom, as she pored through the refuse. If she had scant interest, just enough to flick through leaf by leaf, even taking a cursory glance at the contents, she may have been fortunate to stumble eventually across  correspondence  relating  to  her  own  family  and  how  their poor state of wellbeing was becoming an issue, for the Council at least. especially ‘the house’ the mother built. All the fringe people thought  it  was  such  a  good  house,  ingenious  in  fact,  and  erected similar  makeshift  housing  for  themselves .  Why  couldn’t  they  have waited for a government grant? But pay no neverminds for hooraying Angel day  for  economic  independence.  Mrs  Angel day’s  dream house was considered an eyesore by uptown. All of them humpies popping up all over the prickly bush would have to go. Those eyesores could not live next to the dream of the big Santa Gertrudis. Fibreglass,  steel-spiked,  ironclad  monuments  preoccupied  the Town  Councillors,  and  they  were  using  plenty  of  ink  and  paper recording what they had blabbered to each other. What else  was  life  for  except  just  for  coping,  nothing  else,  so why  be  bothered  reading  what  white  paper  says  only  to  make  it worse? She knew what white persons had to say just by looking at them,  particularly  the  ones  who  wrote  official  papers.  She  called them gammon. Lost amongst these piles of discarded papers, she was left with a  sense  of  melancholy  the  more  she  touched  them.  Nothing seemed  promising  for  Angel day  and  her  treasure  bag.  At  least she could sit in a shady nook amongst the dying oleander hedge cuttings.  Then,  suddenly  from  out  of  the  rustling  papers,  she discovered  a  large  black  mantelpiece  clock  with  a  cracked  glass cover. Carefully, she pushed the paper away. The clock had come from the mayor’s office. She could not believe her luck, not only that the clock had been thrown away, and she had found it, but the key to wind it was still in the back socket. She wound the clock and smiled. It worked. Convinced that the Council people had discarded the clock because  it  was  too  old-fashioned  for  the  new  modern  office building,  Angel d a y  now  had  to  choose  what  she  could  discard from her potato sack. decisions, decisions, she mumbled to herself, sorting  tins  and  bottles  to  make  room  for  the  big  shiny  clock. Then,  recovering  from  the  excitement  of  finding  something  so valuable  at  the  rubbish  tip,  she  realised  the  danger  it  would bring.  She  peered  outside  her  shelter,  scanning  around  to  see who else might be walking about. She asked herself, what if she encountered  the  Council  men  who  drove  the  rubbish  truck? They  would  accuse  her  of  stealing  the  clock  and  drive  straight up to Constable Truthful’s office to report her. She considered the likely consequences of sitting around like a stuffed mullet at the police station. A   vision  of  the  Magistrate’s  face  found  its  way  into  her  little oleander nook. Come back at night he warned. Come back at night and get it. She looked around, considering where to hide the clock, knowing the wild pigs owned the dump at night. She thought of asking Norm to bring her back when he went hunting for the pigs, but she did not feel comfortable with the idea of walking around in the bush with him during the night. Half of the contents had been emptied  from  the  bag  for  the  clock.  To  leave  without  it  was  a betrayal  of  the  future  she  was  already  imagining  in  which  the Phantom children would be going to school on time. No one in the Phantom family would be guessing the time anymore from where the  sun  sat  in  the  sky.  In  the  new  sweet  life,  the  Phantom  family would  be  marching  off  to  bed  at  the  correct  time,  just  like  the school thought was really desirable, then they would march off to school on time to do their school work. With the clock in the bag, she was preparing to leave her little world  of  white  paper  and  decaying  foliage,  when  something  else caught  her  eye.  First  of  all  she  saw  the  base  of  the  statue  with  a handwritten date – 1947. It had to be broken she thought, as she pushed the rubbish away, but found it was not even cracked, as she inspected a statue of the Virgin Mary. The statue looked old and the paint was chipped in places. Angel thought Norm might have some spare paint she could use to repaint the statue, particularly where  the  lines  of  gold  and  silver  had  disappeared  on  the  cloak. The  Virgin  Mary  was  dressed  in  a  white-painted  gown  and  blue cloak.  Her  right  hand  was  raised,  offering  a  permanent  blessing, while  her  left  hand  held  gold-coloured  rosary  beads.  Angel d ay was breathless. ‘This is mine,’ she whispered, disbelieving the luck of her ordinary morning. ‘ This is mine,’ she repeated her claim loudly to the assembled seagulls  waiting  around  the  oleanders.  She  knew  she  could  not leave this behind either, otherwise someone else would get it, and now she had to carry the statue home, for she knew that with the Virgin Mary in pride of place, nobody would be able to interfere with the power of the blessings it would bestow on her home. ‘Luck was going to change for sure, from this moment onwards,’ she told the seagulls, because she, Mrs Angel d ay, now owned the luck of the white people. Not only would her family be able to tell the time, and be able to  tell  other  poor  outsider  people  like  themselves  what  the  time was, but they would also be prosperous. They would become like the white people who prayed and said they were of the Christian faith.  This  was  the  difference  between  the  poor  old  Pricklebush people and uptown. This was how white people had become rich by saving up enough money, so they could look down on others, by keeping  statues  of  their  holy  ones  in  their  homes.  Their  spiritual ancestors would perform miracles if they saw how hard some people were  praying  all  the  time,  and  for  this  kind  of  devotion,  reward them  with  money.  Blessed  with  the  prophecy  of  richness,  money befalls  them,  and  that  was  the  reason  why  they  owned  all  the businesses in town. The seagulls, lifting off all over the dump, in the mind-bending sounds  they  made  seemed  to  be  singing  a  hymn, Glory!  Glory,  Magnificat . The atmosphere was haunting, with steam rising from the  ground,  hovering  birds  in  every  direction,  and  she  simply appeared  from  nowhere,  walking  out  of  the  oleander.  Fugitively, she searched around for potential robbers with her magical brown eyes,  checking  every  angle  for  movement  in  the  distortion  of haphazard,  mass  waste.  She  hurried,  carrying  the  statue  and  the potato sack, eager to escape before the Council men started work in the slow-moving truck. She did not expect to see so many other people from the Pricklebush walking about so early in the morning. Her movements  had  startled  the  otherwise  peaceful  scene where  dozens  of  others  from  the  Pricklebush  had  ensconced themselves  under  cardboard  boxes,  pieces  of  corrugated  iron, inside forty-four-gallon tar barrels, or broken parts of abandoned water tanks. Suddenly, people appeared from everywhere, poking and pulling everything apart, tilling the dumping ground. Children were  playing  in  the  puddles,  parents  gossiping,  others  walking about with their bags full up. Angel day,  queen  herself,  surveyed  their  stares  and  started abusing  first.  She  started  it.  ‘What  are  you  all  staring  at  me  for?’ Her voice had no problem emptying the contents of other people’s lives in the rubbish and calling it nothing. Angel stood her ground. She just started yelling out in a very open manner what she liked, to all and sundry: the same kind of things she called other people all the time around the house. ‘Hey! What are you people doing here?’ she hollered. ‘What’s wrong with you people? You people don’t belong here. Who said you got any normal rights to be hanging around here? on other people’s laaand for? Just taking what you want, hey? What about the traditional owner then?’ Her voice radiated like shock waves all over  the  dump.  Well!  Most  people  had  heard  that  argument before.  Angel day  was  mouthing  off  again  about  the  poor  old traditional  owner  being  bypassed  –  once  again.  And  this  time,  it must have been an unlucky day, because they were having naught of it. You could hear all those people sucking in their breath. Angel had no shame causing all of that trouble. She was a hussy, first class, the old ones had heard people whispering about Angel while she went on her way, cursing them for nothing, as though she was the keeper of other people’s lives. Goodness knows so much happened then. It was hard for two eyes to keep up. Those poor people were pretty upset, and Angel had  no  intuition  about  other  people,  none  at  all.  All  those  grim faces  were  just  glaring  at  her  but  she  did  nothing.  After  several moments the air broke like dynamite. The air broke clean: We can’t help  that,  Mrs  Who-Does-She-Thinks-She- is.   This  came  out  of  the mouth of someone who had picked up straightaway that business line  of  hers  of not  belonging  here. She  called  out  for  everybody  to decide  who  she  thinks  she  is.  There  was  going  to  be  a  war,  good and  proper.  Gravelly  morning  voices  sounding  like  someone  was jumping  up  and  down  on  their  lungs  shouted  back, She’s  bloody nobody, that’s what.  everyone started slinging off about who would want to belong there  anyway?  The  place  was  a  mess.  The  place  was  too  full  of fighting all the time. everyone was moving forward, screaming at each other. Then they started taunting, throwing sticks and stones at  the  ones  trying  to  defend  the  peace.  Nobody  listened  to  the other because everyone was either that mad in the head or did not care whether they were defending the peace or not. e ach was well and truly sick of it. Sick of Angel day. one big woman, dressed in a big white dress: Well! She looked like  the  white  cliffs  of dover,  and  it  was  she  who  did  most  of  the shouting,  spitting  out  incoherent  words,  on  and  on,  like  she  was never going to stop. She was yelling through spit, asking who that woman  thought  she  was: The  bloody  nobody.   When  Angel day  said the  woman  looked  like  a  fat  white  pig  eating  up  the  traditional owner’s country, the woman said she was going to fix Mrs High and Bloody Mighty, once and for all. What happened then was the war started  again.  Imagine  that.  Precarious  modernity  squashed  by hostilities dormant for four hundred years, and Angel day started it up again over an old clock and a statue. Probably all wars start off by a bit of taunting like this. everyone began picking up weapons the ancient way, arming themselves  with  whatever  they  could  lay  their  hands  on.  People and  children  were  running  around,  picking  up  lumps  of  wood, iron bars, or else brown beer bottles picked up and broken along the neck. everywhere, all you could hear was the sound of bottles being smashed. When all the memories of that day had faded away, that sound of glass smashing still haunted everyone. You see, all the alliances had to be weighed up then and there and on the spot. People who had been getting on well, living side by side for decades, started to recall tribal battles from the ancient past.  It  was  unbelievable,  but  Angel day  was  standing  there oblivious,  hugging  her  statue,  and  telling  people  to  get  off  her land. There were little black flies swarming all over her face but she took  no  notice.  Nobody  had  seemed  to  notice  the  fly  squadrons soaring into the air as though struck by an electrifying volatility; as they swarmed up, they were drawn like magnets to the hot smell of human skin, and thousands buzzed around people’s faces. The old people believed in phenomena as great as this, and said the flies had been drawn up through the centuries to join the battle.  They  claimed  the  spirits  would  never  let  you  forget  the past.  They  drew  lines  in  the  dirt,  calling  people  out  from  the shadows  of  complacency, Get  it  straight  where  you  belong .  People must have felt the chilly spike prodding them to arm, to prepare them to add another chapter in the old war. otherwise they might have never known how to go to war in the way of the old people. Living in harmony in fringe camps was a policy designed by the invader’s  governments,  and  implemented,  wherever  shacks  like Angel day’s  swampside  residences  first  began  to  be  called  a community. The old people wrote about the history of these wars on rock. Now, centuries later the poor things had turned up with nothing fancy, not one of them weighed down with the spoils of war to live in the Pricklebush, yet carrying a heavy weight all the same. Angel day’s heart was big and ignorant in those days, but she believed  she  filled  the  shoes  of  Normal’s  grandfather,  who  had been the keeper of this land. No one entered these parts without first speaking their business to the keeper, and to her mind, she was it. She welcomed those who walked heavy with the inheritance of antiquity stashed in their bones. Pride swelled up inside her when she saw those with a landscape chiselled deep into their faces and the  legacy  of  ancestral  creation  loaded  into  their  senses.  She guarded those whose fractured spirits cried of rape, murder and the  pillage  of  their  traditional  lands. over  time,  they  all  became fringe dwellers living next to the rich white man’s municipality, all squatting next to Angel day’s lake, on her so-called land, where she reigned like a queen over her dominion. And the domiciated? Well! They ignored her. It is hard to determine how sides were forged, but when the fighting  began,  the  blood  of  family  ties  flew  out  of  the  veins  of people, and ran on the ground just like normal blood, when face and limbs are cut like ribbons with broken glass, or when the body has been gouged with a piece of iron, or struck on the head over and over with a lump of wood. Angel d ay did not fight because she was  still  hugging  onto  her  statue  and  encouraging  the  human explosion to take hold. It was like sinking an anchor. ‘What about the  traditional  owner?’  She  was  still  screaming  out  her  esteemed rights.  Maybe  she  did  not  register  the  carnage.  The  woman  who looked like the white cliffs of d over, whom the fighting had carried some distance away, picked up the voice of Angel day screaming, and looked over at her with a perplexed look, then walked out of the fight, straight back over to where she had originally challenged Angel, and wrestled the statue away from her. The children, their bodies twisting in and out of the maze of adults at war, were wondering what was going to happen next. They  rushed  in  like  frantic  butterflies  to  be  next  to  kinfolk bleeding,  or  to  others  falling  on  the  ground  and  not  moving again. Young Will Phantom was running with his brothers and sisters  to  protect  his  mother  from  the  big  woman  whose  eyes were  protruding,  as  she  wrestled  with  the  statue  splashed  with blood.  The  woman  acted  like  she  was  possessed  by  a  demon, whose body continued to use all of its strength on one thought alone: to secure the statue into a position to slam Angel day off the face of the earth. Young Will Phantom thought quickly. He ran home as fast as his ten-year-old legs would carry him, rushed into the kitchen and grabbed  the  cigarette  lighter  left  lying  on  the  kitchen  table,  then ran back to the dump. Any stack of papers he could find, he lit. He lit the dry grass around the edge of the dump so there was fire spreading over the claypans in every direction. Black clouds billowed  straight  through  the  dump.  The  smell  of  burning  grass and debris was suffocating, and everywhere people were coughing. Very soon, people could be seen moving through the dense smoke, helping  others  through  the  burnt  grass  and  back  along  the  path with  smouldering  smoke  on  either  side.  Nobody  spoke  as  they limped  by  as  fast  as  they  could,  passing  others,  helping  to  cart injured relations home. Then, when the alarm was rung in town, they scattered. Seeing the black smoke rising from the dump, everyone started to  hear  about  the  big  fight  going  on.  They  all  wished  they  could have killed Angel day, walking with her statue and surrounded by her  kids,  following  her  home.  The  fire  brigade,  already  moving slower  than  a  month  of  Sundays,  became  bogged  on  the  muddy road to the dump just two minutes out of town. The Pricklebush around the Phantoms’ place was silent when the  policeman  arrived  to  investigate,  followed  by  half  of  the uptown  Town  Council  on  foot,  after  they  came  through  the waterlogged  road.  They  claimed  it  was  their  business  to  find  out what caused the fire. It was a wasted trip at the taxpayer’s expense, because nobody living around the swamp had seen a thing. Maybe, the  fire  was  just  some  old  log  smouldering  over  the  weekend  and  caught alight .  It  was  a  strange  thing  to  say.  All  the  same,  the  young  cop Truthful  said  he  could  not  help  noticing  a  lot  of  injured  people everywhere  he  went.  He  got  to  asking:  ‘What  happened  to  you then?’  While  his  entourage  waited  in  anticipation  for  a  different answer. ‘Just an accident, sir, no problem.’ ‘No?’ ‘No, there is no problem here.’ ‘What happened then?’ he asked, just to show the Council men he was on top of the job. ‘ Ah! I fall over.’ ‘How did you fall then?’ ‘I fall over.’ ‘Where?’ ‘Fall over?’ ‘What?’ everywhere Truthful asked the question, he received a grand demonstration of hand movements. ‘Hmmm! oh ! My. I am feeling no good! No good at all today! If you had any sense you’d run us up  to  the  hospital  like  a  good  boy.’  Truthful  had  the  woman  with what was left of the white dress with him. Angel came straight up to her with outstretched arms, and hugged her, but it was full of hate. The Council  men  and  women  too,  following  Truthful  into every  household  in  the  camp,  looking  on  in  mock  silence,  gave knowing looks to one another of a familiar: Nudge-nudge! Winkwink! if you please! What’s  he been up too, jumping over the back fence at night  already ?  Look  at  the  familiarity  if  you  please.  What  was  the world coming to, when the police force had no power over these people?  Acutely  embarrassed  by  his  lack  of  progress,  and overhearing the whispering behind his back, Truthful terminated the sideshow with a demonstration of Brisbane Valley cop briskness by saying he was arresting the first likely suspects to catch his eye. The  bemused  Council  people  crowding  around,  uninvited, huddling  to  avoid  bodily  contact  with  anything  inside  the Pricklebush home in case they picked up something quite dreadful, and having had an eyeful of poverty chipped at Truthful: Let’s take em and take em, get em off our backs, bloody mongrels are a prime nuisance to everyone anyhow. Send these two little buggers off to a reform school or something. That will show them who’s boss of this town. It is true that silence has a cloak because it covered all of those little  tin  humpies  all  day  after  the  official  people  went  back  to minding their own businesses. Normal Phantom sat at his kitchen table glaring at Angel whenever she came into the room. Neither spoke. He knew what had happened. And she was not repentant, not  one  bit.  There  was  no  end  of  her  fussing  over  her  statue, cleaning it, looking at it, examining the cracks and chips, helping herself to the full range of Normal’s fish paints, making a pride of place for it in her bedroom. The day slipped into an even quieter night with no lanterns lit. The Pricklebush wore the total darkness of cloud cover. once  the  dawn  broke,  Normal  Phantom  stepped  out  of  his house to go down to the boat. It was then he felt the eerie quietness, a stillness he found difficult to place, where even the birds did not sing. And no sign of his bird. He  was  expecting  retaliation,  and  he  looked  around  up  in the  branches  of  the  trees  to  find  his  bird.  As  he  surveyed  the surroundings,  something  struck  him  as  being  out  of  place,  a surreal  quietness:  silence  had  replaced  the  noise  of  children’s crying, families arguing. The Phantom family was on its own. The other families had moved during the night. In complete and utter silence, they had picked up everything they owned, and moved to the other side of town. That was when the war of the dump caused the  division,  and  people  realigned  themselves, eastsider  or Westsider, and that was that. The Phantoms lost whatever near and dear  or  distant  relatives  they  had,  except  some  old  people  who refused  to  move.  No  one  else  wanted  to  put  up  with  another minute more of what they called Mrs Angel day. The war  of  the  dump  burst  apart  the  little  world  of  the Phantoms and their related families. everyone in the Pricklebush from elder to child, eastsider to Westsider, injured and uninjured started bringing up their faded memories of the ancient wars, to be renewed with vigour and the hard evidence of all facts. everyone now knew of someone in their families who had been assigned to make  the  long  pilgrimage  over  their  vast  lands  which  occupied dozens  of  cattle  stations,  where  they  travelled  in  clapped-out vehicles,  near  and  far  within  their  tribal  territories,  to  seek  out their  very  old  senior  Law  people.  The  old  people  were  always elusive too, never being where they should be, when their relatives turned up. ‘Well! Where’s old White Whiskers?’ ‘He must have gone that-a-way.’ The challenge was to be always on the move, following the old ones travelling their country to at least a thousand sites they knew by memory. It was a test of how good they knew the country before they were able to find old White Whiskers waiting for them. e very family had to know the story of the past. k now, to go about their separate ways, by reclaiming land from fighting long ago. on  the other hand, the townsfolk of desperance could not make heads  or  tails  out  of  why  they  were  being  sandwiched  between Aboriginal people, not only living on either side of them now, but setting  up  two  camps  without  even  saying  to  anybody  what  they were doing. All of those families that moved over to the eastside to get away from the Phantoms, had walked noisily through town in the middle of the night. everyone had been in a state of high agitation, with loud arguments taking place about the decision to move, Should’ve,  shouldn’t’ve ,  all  to  the  rhythm  of  cyclone  fences being  scraped  with  heavy fighting  sticks  by  some  of  the  youths. People were complaining to each other about the weight of their ragtag  belongings,  while  children  zigzagged  all  over  the  street with their laughter and cries being heard everywhere. What did it matter to try to hush all the little children since that many dogs in  tow,  stirred  up  by  the  scraping  sticks,  joined  in  the  racket  by running up and down the fences of white people’s homes barking their heads off or leaping up and throwing themselves against the tin walls while trying to get over the fences, and equally with the town dogs inside doing the same, trying to get out? None of this racket worried their owners. Nor did the straggle-taggle give one iota to the peace and quiet of the town. Whatever! Nevermind! as if the town with all of its laws and by-laws for inhabitation did not  exist.  It  was  as  if  they  could  not  care  less  whether  the townsfolk, woken up with all the noise, switched on every single light in their houses in the middle of the night, and stood silently in the front yards, gobsmacked, comprehending they were in the middle of a riot. Word quickly came back to Norm about what they were saying down at the Council. The town was up that quick smart, nice and early in the morning, looking out around their front yards again, as if searching for order, trying to locate some sense of normality, and  the  main  street  was  normal,  as  though  nothing  had  ever happened  in  the  night. everyone  of  the  white  skin  jumped  into their showers and scrubbed themselves hard for this was what high and  mighty  powerful  people  did  when  they  felt  unclean,  before running out the door, where they went straight over to the Council to talk about the uproar. everyone was up in arms even before the meeting got started. This  was  the  normal  way  they  talked  straight.  No,  no  coloured person  was  ever  going  to  forget  about  this  incident  of  lawless carrying-on  like  they  owned  the  place.  A  whiff  on  the  gossip grapevine said who was to blame. ‘It was bloody Normal Phantom. Wouldn’t  you  believe  it.  So  what  then?  The  man  is  incapable  of handling his wife. What then? Teach him that’s what. Well! We will teach him what’s what.’ That year, Normal Phantom had no chance of winning citizen of the year, nor forever perhaps. The bell  was  tolling,  ringing  non-stop  for  half  an  hour,  but Normal Phantom never responded to the sound of bells. When no one in the prickly bush camps saw the Phantoms getting involved in uptown  business,  they  also  ignored  the  bells.  The  Phantoms only went into town when the bells rang for the sea. Normal said that  was  the  only  important  reason  for  ringing  the  bell,  because what  happened  to  the  sea  affected  every  single  one  of  them.  ‘We are the flesh and blood of the sea and we are what the sea brings the land.’ This was not a sea matter, so no adult person from the Pricklebush went running to see what they wanted. Yes, there was plenty of worry. Worry straight for uptown. The Council had a string of evening meetings so everyone could come along and have their voice heard. It was like living in a democracy. Paranoia was the word that best described what took place inside of the squashed Council chambers. everyone had a story to tell about some Aboriginals who they saw sitting under a tree thinking about lighting fires. Some Aboriginals were seen pushing up into uptown itself – abandoned car bodies to live in. You could see Aboriginals living in them behind the fences at the end of their backyards even. Aboriginals were thinking about setting up another camp. The net was not working. What was happening to the net? Wasn’t the net supposed  to  be  there  for  the  purposes  of  protecting  the  town against encroachment from people who were not like themselves? ‘ Ya  mean  coons?’  Sanguine-voiced,  the  local  mayor  was speaking.  A  big,  beefy,  six-two,  no-fuss  man,  who  liked  to  call chalk chalk, or night night. That was his motto. He over  shadowed the town with his power. ‘ excuse me, Mr Bruiser, Mayor, you don’t have to talk like that. We are just saying that they are an eyesore, so what are you going to do about it?’ Stan Bruiser  was  a  straight  speaker  and  was  such  a  popular mayor  for uptown  of desperance,  that  for  ten  straight  years,  he had been voted its citizen of the year. it was rigged , some said of the voting  box  in  the  Council  office.  But  be  what  it  may,  tampering with  a  ballot  box  was  no  great  sin  when  conspiratory  theorists worked  with  no  proof.  Bruiser,  now  fifty-six,  was  a  prosperous cattle  man,  with elvis  combed-back  hair  and  sideburns,  dyed  the colour  of  a  Santa  Gertrudis.  He  was  a  hawker  by  trade  until  his change of luck due to a foray into the Australian stock market, after he picked up a hint late one night on the radio in the mining-boom seventies. Next day, he piled his last quids in the stock exchange on a tin-pot mining company that struck it rich in Western Australia. So very quick, he was rich. Good luck  to  him  one  supposes,  for  he  cleaned  up  with  his shares and with the spoils, means and wherewithal, he reinvented himself, from somebody driving around the outback’s dying towns and Aboriginal camps on pension day, selling the necessities of life for a profit of three to four hundred per cent after costs. A quid to be made. But just how could one uneducated man, a man just like themselves, make so much money in his lifetime? It was unnatural. Anyone  could  have  done  it,  he  joked,  if  he  had  been  half  smart about prices by collecting drought-time cattle properties like lollies, paying unpaid debts. Bruiser spoke of being the epitome of the self-made man, and the  ‘self-made  24/7  man’  angle  was  slotted  into  his  utterings  to other desperanians  during  Australia day,  May day,  Picnic day, Pioneer  day  celebrations  where  he  had  the  right  to  speak,  right through,  down  to  the  demands  he  made  of  politicians  whose colleagues heard his booming voice on the phone in the hallowed halls of southern parliaments. The old  people  in  the  Pricklebush  said  the  story  about  the money of hell was different, because Bruiser had unnatural scars that  looked  like  someone  had  welded  an  extra  skin  to  his  body. They had observed the extra piece of skin that ran from his skull down the left side of his face, along one side of his body, down to his feet and back again, running up the back this time, right up to his skull. Was that unusual? darn right! everyone in the Pricklebush thought  so.  Some  of  the  old  ladies  were  more  than  curious  and yelled  out  whenever  he  came  down  to  the  Pricklebush  camps  – ‘Hey! How come the devil stitched you up like a pod?’ Bruiser was sensitive  about  his  scars  and  ignored  their  questions.  So  they spread the word he was an alien, though wisely no one dared say such a thing to his face. You would have to be nuts to say anything like that to Bruiser. Bruiser said he had seen everything as far as he was concerned and there was only one motto to life. ‘If you can’t use it, eat it, or fuck it, then it’s no bloody use to you.’ It brought the house down as  usual.  This  was  how  the  town  would  size  up  the  problem  of Aboriginal people squatting behind their houses, he explained with a loud clap of his hands, encouraging others to do the same. He said the government should put the Abos to work and he would write a letter  to  every  politician  this  side  of  the  black  stump  telling  them exactly that. He nutted out how this employment policy would work. He said they would do what he did to make a living. ‘Put them to work making keys so they can lock their food up somewhere and not  have  to  share  everything  they  get  with  their  families.’  He explained  that  when  he  was  a  hawker  the  one  thing  everyone wanted was keys – ‘There was real money in keys.’ Number two, he explained, ‘They should be forced to make bathtubs, like the old tin  ones,  so  they  could  take  regular  baths.’  And  number  three, ‘They should be sent back to the cattle stations and made to work for nothing, board and keep, that’s good enough for them if they aren’t interested in making money to get ahead like everyone else.’ Bruiser got a huge round of applause and after a bit of rumbling about the government doing nothing, someone suggested that they needed direct action. once Bruiser got the meeting stirred up, he went out the back with a few of his cattlemen friends to enjoy the fresh  air  and  partake  in  some  liquid  refreshments,  to  keep  them charged  up  to  go  back  later  on,  and  finish  off  the  meeting. Although how it ended up, they stayed outside making themselves so  pickled  and  pie-eyed,  nothing  mattered  anymore.  What  was strategy?  This  left  the  new  town  clerk,  Libby  Valance,  a  man accused of neither being local nor understanding the region and its values, to chair the throng. Yet Valance was educated in local government, and had been given  the  job  in  the  first  place  because  he  was  considered  to  be sensible. He addressed the meeting in his fine voice which reached no higher than midway, by saying that it was his Christian duty to take a more civil line of approach in advising what a town could do with  its  citizens.  No  way,  voices  were  beseeching, Why  couldn’t  we just? Bulldoze the crap out  of those camps, flatten the lot?  Why not? ‘Well! The  last  time  the  Council  did  it,’  Valance  explained,  ‘they  just started rebuilding, because they had nowhere else to go.’ So! The meeting went on. Make them go, there  must be somewhere else they can go, why do they want to come here for  anyway?  Those of the Pricklebush mob  who  had  taken  up  the  offer  to  attend  the  meeting  listened, stunned  again  by  how  they  had  been  rendered  invisible,  while Valance continued, ‘It is because they have a right to be here just like anyone else.’ Bruiser, having come back inside, responded with the following salient points on behalf of all indignities: ‘Huh! Think they do. Then they should live like everyone else then. right! Let’s go tell ’em.’ A small delegation, made up of representatives from uptown and the black busybodies who went along to these popular Council meetings,  came  over  one  afternoon,  to  have  a  word  with  Norm Phantom.  It  had  never  escaped  Norm’s  notice  that  somehow uptown had encumbered him with the title with all of its glory – leader of the Aboriginal people. They said they wanted him to get those people who had moved out of Westside, and were now living in  abandoned  car  bodies  and  their  makeshift  camps  behind people’s housing, to start living like white people, if they wanted to live in town. ‘Couldn ’t  give  a  stuff  about  them,’  Norm  grunted,  still  bent over his taxidermy efforts on a giant prawn. The uptown prospect, Cilla Mooch, an Aboriginal man learning how to shape himself into a white mould with one of those perpetual traineeship  work-for-the- dole  programs  spread  over  the  length and  breadth  of  Australia  in  the  name  of  economic  development, worked in the Council office. He stood next to Valance, and as it had  been  predetermined  by  the  Council,  was  the  voice  in  this delegation. Norm Phantom might reason with someone of his own ilk. Moochie spoke in broken english. ‘You know?! That what’s what they is saying about you and all. Saying you started all of this town camps stuff springing up here and  there  for  we  mob.  Saying  they  got  to  stop  it.  Show  a  bit  of respect  for  the  place.  Place  belonga desperance  Shire  Council. Stop the place looking like an infestation of black heads and what have you.’ ‘ You sound like a fuzzy wuzzy, Mooch. Aren’t got anything to do with me and talk english,’ Norm muttered irritably, still engrossed with  the  delicate  operation  on  his  prawn  with  a  toothpick  in  one hand  and  a  large  magnifying  glass  in  the  other.  Norm  always remembered the prawn. He did not attempt many, but this one was a special creature. rare, for it only lives in the crystal clear waters away in the gorges of his father’s father’s country. unique for its size. Norm  had  hoped  by  saying  little,  the  insignificant  white  ants would disappear and let him get on with his work. However, too little was too late. It was not to be. ‘Whatya doing around here for Moochie?’ Full of grace, Angel day stepped into the fishroom. She said she was nosing around to see what all the talk was about. She had torn herself away from the statue of Mary, which she had now repainted  in  the  colour  of  her  own  likeness.  She  had  examined pictures in the children’s prayer books and after considering every detail  of  what  needed  to  be  done,  she  believed  she  knew  how  to restore  the  statue. every  bit  of  her  time  and  attention  had  been given in its reconstruction, which had now departed from that of its familiar image, to one who watches over and cares for the claypan people in the Gulf country. Improvisation with Norm’s fish colours and textures resulted in a brightly coloured statue of an Aboriginal woman who lived by the sea. The work had taken her several days. She had not even noticed that the other families had left, or believed it was possible when Norm blamed her for their leaving. ‘If they gone, then they’ll be back,’ she had told him flatly, as she did to the delegation who had come from uptown to confront Norm. She said she thought they would not have the wherewithal to  go  setting  up  camp  on  the  other  side  of  town.  ‘Where’s  the water? Anyone mind telling me that? No tap? No tap! So how are they  going  to  get  water  from  them  mob  then?’  She  looked  the delegation  over  with  her  cold  eyes,  waiting  for  a  response,  and when  no  one  dared  to  offer  her  a  peep,  she  sighed  heavily  and launched into her attack. ‘What  you people worried about then? Stupid, you people. You want to think about things if you got any sense. Isn’t it, they going to get sick and tired quick smart when they have to keep walking ’bout this other side of town to cart water for themselves?’ The delegation  turned  their  attention  away  from  Normal  to Angel day,  who  engaged  them  further  in  discussion  about  the water situation for the itinerants, as she called them. Norm could not help but be impressed with her ability to mislead people. The delegation  looked  at  her  talking  down  to  them  with  awe  written across its faces. Where did she get it from he wondered? itinerants  was not the language of the Pricklebush. Some people in the delegation began talking about how they had carried the cross of Jesus to protect them. ‘We prayed to God to  help  us  today  and  we  carried  the  big  crucifix  along  to  shield ourselves.’ Those who wore them around their necks, proved their point  by  dragging  crucifixes  out  from  under  their  clothing  and displaying their crosses to each other, as though the gesture would provide  them  warmth,  and  secure  them  from  the  wrath  of  God, which they suspected hovered over Normal Phantom’s household. Holy  smoke!  It  was  hot.  Angel  was  not  amused  by  the  religious posturing uptown always used to get its own way. Norm watched her  run  back  into  the  house,  listened  with  the  others  to  her footsteps on the tin floor of the corridor, and suddenly she burst back in the room, brandishing her statue, held up high above her head as she danced around the delegation like a strutting pigeon. It  was  a  transfixing  sight.  The  delegation  was  shocked  by  this spectacle  of  irreverence  for  their  religion,  some  even  recognising the statue, and were about to say: ‘I know where that came from,’ but were speechless. All eyes followed the Aboriginal Mary, bobbing past them, jumping back and forth. It did not trouble Normal. He tried to concentrate on his work while there was still light left in the day. He knew what Angel was capable of doing, or thought so. What  she had to say was long and hard: ‘We are decent people here, my family. We make no trouble for anybody. So why for you want to come down here making trouble for we  all the time? I tell you how I won’t stand for it; I can’t even stand you people. I don’t want you murdering types around here bothering my family all the time,  you  hear  me?  Covering  up  for  someone  who  even  tried  to murder me once and other atrocities as well going on. If you mob come  back  here  again,  (she  paused  to  think),  I’ll  tell  you  what  I will  be  doing.  I  will  be  pressing  that  many  charges  through  the legal  service  for  Aborigines  for  attempted  murder,  that’s  what. And while I am at it, I will be suing the town as accomplices to a conspiracy to have my person killed and the persons of my family murdered  before  they  were  born,  and  for  damages  for  the  ones who were born. Goodness knows how we can’t sleep at night as it is with the worry. I don’t know how much money you’ve all got in the bank, but you will be paying who knows what for damages. It might even cost the whole town. I have already spoken long distance on the phone to my lawyer and he said it might be a pretty good test case.  Watertight  even,  so  what  do  you  think  about  that,  hey?’ under heavy cloud cover which brought on a premature nightfall, the uptown  delegation  looked  at  each  other  through  flashes  of lightning  in  the  fishroom,  and  were  shocked,  like  the  suspended school of silver fish from the sea, jumping up and down in fright. Normal remembered  feeling  that  there  had  been  no  end  to Angel’s obsessive behaviour since she laid her hands on the statue. She had even placed it in the bedroom looking onto their bed, so he could not be bothered sleeping there anymore. She had forced him to live in the fishroom, which she now took over, with half the town  having  a  heated  argument  in  there  as  well.  The  cockatoo screeched its head off in the storm outside as it flew around, circling the house. Then, to cap it off, the crickets were stirred into wakefulness,  and  began  their  choice  of  music. ears  pricked  and prickled to hear the foreign, shrilling sounds of Handel’s oratorio in full orchestra. The delegation listened for a short time, and this strange and severe sounding improvisation must have taken the cake,  because  there  was  a  mad  rush  to  leave  via  a  rubble  of disorientation, and rumble, as they raced over the puddles on the corrugated tin-floored corridor. Normal, forced  to  become  part  of  the  excessiveness  of  his home,  helped  the  disoriented  delegation  outside  into  the  storm, where they set off up the muddy road to uptown, hoping to find their  way  home  in  the  darkness. until,  that  was,  lo  and  behold, Mayor Bruiser turned up wet and blind drunk, and when he got the drift of Angel’s argument, he started to kick the air and shout into the kitchen doorway, that he was not going to have a bunch of blacks tell him what to do with the town. Bruiser could  see  Angel day  inside,  still  carrying  on  about lawyers, and laughed drunkenly, ‘Here’s a woman who still likes a good poke. don’t you like a good poke Angel?’ He started to tease the Christian man Valance, ‘Go and ask her if you can have a go.’ When she ignored him the mayor started taunting her about the times he chased her on horseback down to the creek until her bony legs gave up. ‘ oh! don’t be bashful, you remember me.’ everyone in  town  knew  how  he  bragged  about  how  he  had  chased  every Aboriginal woman in town at various times, until he ran them into the  ground  then  raped  them.  He  had  branded  them  all,  like  a bunch of cattle, he gloated. Angel day came out of the house with a billycan full of boiling water and threw it at Bruiser’s voice in the dark, but missed. She went  back  into  the  house  and  the  delegation  could  hear  her stomping around the kitchen, throwing things around, screaming out  how  she  was  looking  for  a  sharp  knife  so  that  she  could  slit Bruiser’s neck from left to right. What was left of the embarrassed delegation  stood  around  in  the  rain.  Next  thing,  Norm  came flying  out  of  the  house  threatening  the  Mayor  with  his  boning knife, screaming, ‘I got this to make you shut up, you dog.’ With the knife swishing back and forth, Norm backed Bruiser through the  mud,  out  of  the  yard.  Bruiser  moved  away  but  kept  yelling, ‘I’ll be back later and I will fucking get you, Norm Phantom.’ With that,  the  deafening  sound  of  squawking  seagulls  took  over  the court  with  a  loud  crack  of  thunder,  so  everyone  looked  up,  and when  lightning  illuminated  the  skies,  they  saw  that  there  were thousands of the seagulls gathered overhead, hovering above the Phantom’s house, and right back up the road towards desperance. In an era when people were crying for reconciliation, there was fat  chance  that  day.  The  little  delegation  started  walking  back  to town, heads bent like wet seagulls in the stormy rain, away from the troubles of the Pricklebush. every now and again, someone would tell Bruiser to come to his senses because nobody was going to risk their lives in that monstrosity ramshackle deathtrap of a house. So forth  and  so  on,  he  was  pulled  along  with  the  little  throng,  all muddied  up  to  their  knees,  unable  to  untangle  himself  from  the glue of their humiliation. These matters  were  not  helped  by  Angel day,  even  though Normal had pushed her back into the house, for she kept slinging on  about  conspiracies,  and  letting  her  foul  mouth  go  forth  like  a Cape Canaveral launch, full of the most slanderous truth or halftruth she could muster from every nook and crevice of her brain, and  directed  to  and  then  from  Bruiser  downwards,  as  she  bade them farewell. Normal could have slapped her hard across the face. everyone was egging him to do it: Go on, go on,  you tell her to shut the fuck up , but instead, for he had calmed down a lot, he forced his hand to hold the boning knife pinned to his side. What a hostess. Angel day was too much for a mild man the likes of one who only wanted to work on a prawn. 

Once upon a time, not even so long ago, while voyaging in the blackest of midnights, a strong sea man, who was a wizard of many oceans, had his memory stolen by  thieving  sea  monsters  hissing  spindrift  and spume  as  they  sped  away  across  the  tops  of  stormy waves grown taller than the trees. The mariner, robbed of fear, his navigation birthright and his good sense, did not call to his God, but cursed the raging sea in the foulest  language  of  his  homeland. unheard  by  the  tempest,  an austere cyclone called Leda that came this way from across the seas in a once-in-a-hundred-year storm, the man chased after her black wind  to  recapture  his  memories.  Like  a  man  possessed,  he  flew through towering banks of waves whose crests collided and rolled with the spirit clouds of the heavens above. o pen-mouthed waves roared  with  thousands  of  others  in  that  terrible,  deafening nightmare  of  the  troubled  sea,  and  rolled  poor  old elias  Smith down into the crushing depths of hell before throwing him back up again, flinging him to and fro. And he? Mouth agape, hoarse throat yelling  nothing  but  silence,  he  kept  on  chasing  the  black  wind before losing his memory forever. I t was in those precise moments when elias Smith was fighting hopelessly to save his identity, when his loss became absolute, that another unusual thing happened in this part of the world, that was far  away  from  everything  else.  Lightning  forked  up  from  the  sea, springing out of the mouths of sacred underwater locations along a straight  line  heading  many  kilometres  in  a  southerly  direction, towards the coastline, until the last arm of the white golden fork went straight up the trunk of the lightning tree of an important dreaming story hereabout. Fortunately for some, unfortunate for others, the tree  was  growing  in  the  small  coastal  town  of desperance,  tucked away in the Gulf of Carpentaria. There was  nobody  alive  who  could  claim  to  have  seen  this strange  thing  happen  before,  but  history  was  repeating  itself, because  this  was  the  ancient  story  of  the  prodigal  coppiced  tree standing there, in the middle of town. A tremendous thunderclap exploded  above  the  tree.  It  came  from  deep  inside  the  world  of those  black  serpent  clouds  and  even  from  far  away,  people  said later  on,  as  word  filtered  back,  that  they  too  had  listened  to  the haunting echo of the thunder rolling back to the sea. Finally, when the thunder had faded away, a wind full of sand whistled over the coast from the sea bringing with it the hardest rain ever imagined, and afterwards, all time stopped. Time  stopped  tick-tocking,  because  there  was  too  much moisture  in  the  air  and  it  had  interfered  with  the  mechanical workings of dozens of watches and clocks that ended up jiggered, and  afterwards,  were  only  fit  to  be  thrown  down  on  the  rubbish dump. In the  morning,  the  drowsy  people  of  the  little  town  of desperance  unbattened  the  hatches  with  an  enormous  sigh  of relief,  because  all  they  had  copped  from  Leda  was  a dry   storm. They  had  been  awoken  by  the  eerie  feeling  of  hearing  complete silence for the first time in their homes, and they were out of bed in  a  flash,  long  before  the  cursed  town’s  roosters  started  to  crow. Noticing  every  clock  had  stopped  ticking  the  time  away,  the townspeople  flicked  on  the  radio. everyone  listened  in  silence  to the weatherman’s voice saying the potentially destructive Leda had passed  by  the  coastline,  but  she  had  raged  like  a  madwoman, causing havoc for all the ships in the area, one hundred kilometres away out at sea. Though the town felt the joy of escaping the full force of the cyclone with winds up to 225 kilometres an hour, an uneasy feeling developed. They sensed something else hung heavy in the air. They were suddenly struck with a single idea, a sense of hopeless  prognostication  that  before  too  long  there  would  be another ominous piece of bad luck, because all bad luck happened in threes – the storm, the clocks, so something else was sure as hell going to happen to them. It was hard to describe how the anxiety intensified  through  people’s  bodies  after  they  had  awoken  to  the strange  sensation,  for  everyone  quickly  collapsed  back  into slumberous dreams of aching bones, which ripened the next day into change-in-weather influenza. The static electricity hung in the air, so in the morning, when uptown  people  awakened  again  with  woolly  mouths  and  runny eyes,  they  were  completely  startled  to  find  that  everything  they touched gave them a little shock, but this did not stop them from going  around  touching  this  and  that,  like  the  charged  fur  of  a whining  dog,  or  a  startled  domestic  cat,  just  to  see  what  would happen.  All  askew,  and  sticking  out  like  porcupine  needles,  were the big, mutton-chop sideburns of every man, black or white, in the entire  district,  who  had  unconsciously  modelled  himself  on  the image of elvis Presley. This strange occurrence of the static electricity was a part of the unsettling state of things even before the soot-stained kettles blew their whistles in all those humid kitchens nestled across the flat  lands.  Moribund  householders  sat  wondering  what  in  the hell’s  name  was  going  to  happen  to  them  in  the  end. even before a single sip of tea from a rose floral china cup, or any old tin pannikin with the scratched initials of the owner’s name on the side, or plastic mug, or heavy earthenware cup of fawn and brown,  had  reached  dry  lips,  bringing  some  life  and  sense  of propriety  back  into  the  bleak  faces  of  all  who  dwelled  safely within  this  world  of up town,  everyone  knew  something  was amiss. It was not a funny thing at all for any town that believed itself to be swathed in the providence of good Christian beliefs from the Bible, to be reduced to the basest feelings of primordial insecurity. And  what  was  more  unsettling  was  the  spine-chilling  realisation that such a mighty town like desperance might have no power at all,  if  it  came  to  the  crunch.  Not  a  single  bird  had  begun  its morning  tune,  and  on  top  of  it  all,  as  daylight  came,  everyone could  see  for  themselves  that  the  world  had  turned  red.  When they looked at their own fair skin, it was another shock to their lives to see their skin was red. everyone  local  by  nature  ventured  out  of  their  houses.  They were  trying  to  understand  what  was  happening,  for  everywhere they looked, they saw trees, the landscape, grass, even the sea water had  taken  on  hues  of  red.  No  one  had  ever  witnessed  such  an abnormal sunrise, struggling through the cover of misty cloud and haze of smoke coming from those fires in the inland bush, further south from desperance. It was such an extraordinary kind of day. The cloudy-coloured sea was high and brought king tides several kilometres  inland.  Sea  water  lapped  at  the  town  edge.  Waves pounded the flat lands. The broken clocks were compared and it was  established  that,  for  unknown  reasons,  all  local  time  had stopped  at  precisely  eleven  minutes  past  midnight.  And  the  wise around town said, This was interesting indeed . No  one  remarked  about  the  way  the  air  smelt  of  putrid  salt from the odour of stinking corpses washed off the stagnant floor of the ocean and dumped nilly pilly at their doorsteps. They were only  interested  in  speaking  about  how  lucky  they  were  that  the Christmas  decorations  in  town  had  not  been  ruined.  They regarded  it  as  a  very  strange  miracle  to  see  that  all  the  nativity pieces the Town Council had placed in every front yard for free, could and did survive the galing winds of Leda . She had given the whole  town  the  heebie-jeebies  just  listening  to  her  whistling  her ghostly crying. But the relief was, she had not singled them out. After a spot check was completed, the damage was regarded as minimal. At least a dozen plastic reindeer statues had been blown down  South  to  kingdom  come,  while  for  some  unknown  reason, the  brightly-coloured  plastic  Santas  still  sitting  upright  in  sleighs had  remained.  What  was  even  more  noticeable  to  the  drowsylooking  residents  was  that  all  the  big  puffs  of  cotton-wool  snow that  had  adorned  the  tops  of  every  fence  post  in  town  were hanging limp and sorry-looking. At first glance it looked as though the town had been dragged through a blizzard. However, all said and done, the entire population, the heart of which claimed to be very  Christian-oriented,  felt  fortunate  and  humbled  that  the cyclone  had  not  struck  the  town  or  any  of  its  residents.  They regarded  their  luck  as  a  late  Christmas  present,  in  spite  of everything  else,  from  the  in  visible  one  called  Almighty,  and claimed  He  must  have  listened  to  all  the  feverishly  whispered prayers that were said across town throughout the previous night. But,  before  the  prayers  of  thanksgiving  could  be  sent  to  the Almighty  for  not  causing  a  catastrophe,  danger  signals  struck again.  Word  of  another  miracle  began  spreading  like  wildfire from the kids running up and down the muddy street with heartstopping  excitement. What?  What? said  the  people  who  never listened.  Listen!  Please!  These  little  kids!  The  children,  full  of natural innocence from the obsessive parental protection that was the most endearing thing about desperance, were yelling out how Santa’s  sleigh  must  have  fallen  out  of  the  clouds  in  the  storm. Parents yelled: Come back here you kids! one youngster who stopped to speak, said :  ‘He is coming, so all you people you better come quick and have a look at Santa Claus, because he is walking if you please from the sea, coming straight towards desperance.’  Christmas  was  too  much . High  time  to  be getting over Christmas – it makes parents go mad. Next, a galloping pantomime  of  people  began  running  through  the  mud  with  arms flying,  chasing  one  another,  and  going  after  those  naughty  kids  to get them to come back. The truth  was  that  the  town’s  locals  had  flocked  down,  in droves mind you, to watch the stranger who had long white hair and  beard,  walking  in  the  sea.  As  they  stood  together  on  the foreshore,  no  one  had  a  clue  from  what  anchorage  the  mariner might  have  originally  pulled  up  his  anchor  and  set  his  sail.  This truth was just a mere speck of dust in the minds of uptown, and the  speck  was  roaming,  growing  into  something  else  altogether. uptown being different to everyone else, never let the truth stop a good story from circulating around when there was time to chew the fat. The chitchatting  was  like  a  strong  wind  along  the  foreshore. The  people  of up town  talked  and  talked  and  never  cared  two flaming  hoots  if  anyone  was  listening,  and  there  were  people listening.  There  were  the  old  Pricklebush  people  who  kept  the chronicles  of  the  land  hereabouts  since  time  began.  They  were talking  in  lingo  about  the  huddling  of  the house  flies   they  were noticing  up  along  the  beach.  These  old  people  were  saying  how paradoxically  foolish  of uptown  with  their  airs  and  fancies  to equate  this  miracle  with  the  beliefs  of  the  original  founding people of the seaport of desperance. You only needed to take one look  and  you  could  see  yourself  that  most  of  them  white  folk, about twenty or thirty adults and twice the children standing up on the high ground there – a half a foot above the new sea level – were hand-me-down generations who were nothing like a patch of the original stock:  And thank goodness for small mercies. You could have counted on one hand who amongst up town had even been on the sea. These  people  are  not  any  good.  They  don’t  believe  in  God ,  the  old people  explained,  because  knowing  the  seas,  even  far  from  the Great Southern Land, they referred to the seafarer as a descendant of english gods. They don’t even remember their own religion. All the uptown white folk stood well back from the water’s edge because  if  you  could  read  their  thoughts,  you  would  know  how frightened they were of sea water. This was how it should be: water could jump right out and suck anyone in the undertow of blackness and a terrible death. up  high then, they gathered, all nodding and gesturing  self-righteously  to  each  other  in  their  fashionable proclamations  of  how  they  could  recognise  straightaway  any  old so-and-so  who  lived  by  the  sea.  You  could  hear  their  voices wafting in the wind westward down the beach, saying things like the old sailors would, like – Even anyone, even every child of the Port, could recognise a sea man when they see one coming. on  this  long,  fine  morning,  they  recognised  the  mariner’s harsh  golden  skin  as  their  own. Ah!  Ah!   and Ole  la  la!   exclaimed one, two and three female voices, possibly more, when sighting that shiny  skin  glowing  like  torchlight  whenever  a  spot  of  sunlight escaped through the clouds to beam upon him. A fine looking skin . Someone describing this kind of skin said it could only belong to a sea man because for one thing, he was not coloured – not black or yellow for instance . His hair, long and tatted, was the colour of the antarctic snow. Sometime, long ago, it became bleached from canary yellow in wild winds and seawater salt in his voyages on oceans far and wide. The cantata further proclaimed as though he were a priest:  he cometh soon, a paragon, the quintessential old man of the sea himself . Some folk thereabout desperance  had  already  claimed  to  have  seen  giant serpents in the sea so the magical appearance of the sea man was calming compared to stories like that. others said the lost mariner resembled a perfect human pearl amidst his tangles of ornaments. He  was  like  Jonah  with  cockle-shells,  green  seaweed  and  starfish enmeshed together in a crown of snow. They noticed in his eyes a piercing sea-grey glare of bewilderment. oh! Well sung the oracle: i  repeat, there is nothing to fear from being a stranger to the Great Southern Land . They sang praises. Please put him at ease ,  cried all. How ears burned down in the Pricklebush: So in their dreams ,  they murmured. You got to believe what was true in the homes of desperanians. A folktale of ancient times elsewhere was stored in treasure chests in the minds of these people. A sea people such as themselves come from  so  far  away  to  be  lost,  would  forever  have  all  seas  in  their sights. That was their story. The young people of the Pricklebush who could see distance, said his hands, hard-skinned, scarred and ready, were exactly the same as those men whose skilled hands customarily dragged nets and hooked lines for a job. It was easily assumed on the high-water mark  that  the  man  who  later  became  known  as elias  Smith,  had come  from  some  distant,  mysterious  place  on  the  globe,  where mourning people wearing dark woollen clothes prayed to weathered statues  of  the  Maria  de  la  Mer,  or  Maria  Candida,  Senora  de  la Spain or Madonna, Blessed Virgin, or Saint Nicholi – many, many countless rosaries for the children of oceanides lost at sea. You could tell this man might be equated with the dreamtime world because when his memory was stolen, the mighty ancestral body of black clouds and gale-force winds had spun away, over and done with, in a matter of a flash. The old people said they knew the time  this  had  happened  to elias  Smith  because  they  had  been awake all night watching the sea, and seen the whole catastrophe of  clouds,  waves  and  wind  rolling  away,  off  in  another  direction. elias was left floating face down in the watery jaws of the Gulf of Carpentaria, and as luck would have it, he grabbed a polystyrene fruit box with a bit of fruit still left inside to eat. he floated away on the currents heading our way. The old  people  who  refused  to  go  down  and  join  the  watch because  white  people  were  there,  said  no  one  should  go  about making a major spectacle out of watching a wretched man walking out  of  the  sea,  even  if  he  had  walked  through  twenty-five  kilometres of tidal flats full at high tide with the shallow mud waters at the height of the Wet season. rightly! But that was town . uptown kettle pot was different, Pricklebush whinged, wanting to go too. While  the  Pricklebush  stayed  home,  the up town  people swooped in for the arrival of the stranger like it was something to rejoice  about.  Call  it  a  phobia  about  not  allowing  legends  to  die. Call it flights of fancy that had driven every man, woman and child down onto the high-tide mark to wait patiently, ankle-deep in the mud,  totally  abandoning  all  of  their  daily  jobs  and  duties,  just  to relive a familiar old story about their origins. Afar, at the same time, up along the foreshore, way back up the beach away from the town where the old people watched what the white people were doing, the Aboriginal people of Westside Pricklebush started to stir too. Having heard the commotion, the elders climbed out of their damp  bedding  on  the  ground  where  they  had  slept  through  the cyclone,  to  go  see  where  the  noise  was  coming  from. Someone’s excited  today ,  they  agreed,  while  settling  down  again  in  the  long grass to watch. They always watched the goings-on of uptown with restrained  interest,  and  shortly  afterwards,  began  their  memory revisions.  This  was  a  daily  task,  a  memory  tribunal,  undertaken with  relish  by  the  old  people  for  everyone’s  matter  of  concern  – talking  oral  history  about  the  sequestrators  who  owned uptown. every now and again, they would cast scathing glances up the road in the direction of the town. But on this day, the ancient owl-face woman, staring up the beach with the others in her company, and who  knows  what  she  saw  with  her  eyesight,  on  behalf  of  all  her people proclaimed sarcastically in a loud disgusted voice, ‘Ha! Ha!  Look  at  us.  We  are  the  old  people,  and  we  knows you   not  even know  where you ares from.’ The ‘we’ she was talking about, were her relations, the blackfella mob from Westside of town, belonging to Normal Phantom, the rightful traditional owner. The eastside camp was old Joseph Midnight’s mob exiled from Westside because they wanted to say that nobody else but they were the real traditional landowners where desperance had been built. That idea originated from old Cyclone who was Joseph Midnight’s father. They even made up a name for themselves – Wangabiya – and  said  that  their  tribe  were  the  real  traditional  owners,  before Norm Phantom’s group which they called the tribe of the Johnnycome-latelies  came to the Gulf. Well! even though no tribe on earth existed with that name Wangabiya, you had everyone going around claiming to be a Wangabiya. Lost Wangabiya  started turning up in the  Gulf  from  all  over  the  place:  Brisbane,  Sydney  and  even  one came over from Los Angeles saying he was a Wangabiya, and could speak the lost Wangabiya language. It was the hint of big bickies to be had from big mining that did that. It was unfortunate to have to say it, but those eastside people of old Joseph Midnight were just a  lot  of  nuisance  dogs,  which  was  only  natural  to  expect  because they were nothing but rubbish. They lived among a hundred and one pussycats with pigs. This was  how  the  old  people  on  Westside  rubbished  those  people  on eastside  who,  they  claimed,  knew  nothing  about  culture  if  every one of them had been derived from the genes of trash, from Joseph Midnight. They saw his rubbish blood running through the lot of them so-called Wangabiyas. even all the pigs you see lying around their yards – all called Aunty and uncle – can never be shot,  Oh! No! you cannot shoot that good pig, he’s Uncle . And living in car bodies and  whatnot,  which  was  illegal.  All  of  it  was  part  of  Joseph Midnight’s extortion racket with the government. This was what he got  for  agreeing  to  the  mine.  The  government  gave  him  a  lot  of money,  a  thousand  dollars,  and  said, Go  out  there  and  shoot  the vacuum cleaners, all of the hoovers and Electroluxes – all the feral pigs. Money talks. This was what he got for his Native title rights. Money to shoot all the pigs. He was supposed to exterminate them from the  entire  Gulf  of  Carpentaria  once  and  for  all  but  he  never  did that. He let his useless relatives take all the little baby piglets home for pets and they bred up ten piglets each. The so-called Wangabiyas over eastside were also responsible for  cane  toads,  millions  of  cane  toads  living  in  the  district  to  this day. When they heard that the government was paying fifty cents for a cane toad, you could hear them right over Westside talking and  talking.  They  could  not  stop  wishing  for  the  toads  to  arrive. Oh! Other people are really lucky they got them frogs . Well! How do you think  the  cane  toads  got  into  this  pristine  environment?  Joseph Midnight  brought  them  in  his  port  from  Townsville,  smuggled them in, not that anyone was there to stop him. Now, shine a torch around outside and you will see nothing but a plague of cane toads all  over  the  place.  So,  this  was  the  type  of  people  they  were  – unscrupulous,  nasty  kind  of  people  –  even  without  talking  about the land they tried to steal. What was really offensive to the Westside elders was that those squatter people even had the audacity to open their mouths about somebody’s  else’s  land. They  forget  they  never  had  any  land  for  a thousand years . And if you see that there are no little native animals around  anymore  it  was  because  those  people  ate  them.  Ate everything. You would think that would be a good case for a bit of serenity  around  these  parts  from  those  people,  when  they  are living on somebody else’s land, and treating it like vacuum cleaners sucking  up  the  wildlife.  You  would  think  that,  but  their  loose tongues did not know the meaning of the word serenity.  over  there  on eastside,  the  thieves  talked  about  nothing  all day, and all night long. It was enough to drive people away. These people  were  so  habituated  to  talking,  the  drone  of  their  voices drove  other  people  mad,  and  even  some  people  who  had  got trapped  on eastside  and  could  not  escape  because  they  had  no money to buy a ticket out of the place had to be taken away down South  on  the  Flying doctor’s  plane,  to  be  put  away  in  a  mental institution. A lot  of  people  wanted  to  know  what eastside  talked  about? Well! Nothing much. They just talked about anything that popped into their heads. Mention a word. Mention horse, and they would talk  about  horses  all  day  long.  Mention  shopping,  and  all  night long they would talk about shopping. Mention fighting, and they would go out after dinner and half murder someone. Westside old people accused those people of being so full of madness, they said it had to be punishment from the spirits for disgracing the country not rightfully theirs, in any case. So  there  it  was:  fringe  camps  sandwiching desperance,  and nothing  better  to  do  with  themselves  than  to  sit  about  watching white  folk  of uptown  going  about  their  business.  It  was  hard  to imagine something being so ingrained it cannot be scrubbed away like  ink  stains  on  the  carpet.  It  was  like  blood  stains.  This  was exactly what it was like. So, the ‘edge’ people, all of the blackfella mob living with quiet breathing  in  higgily-piggerly,  rubbish-dump  trash  shacks,  all popped any old where in the prickly bushes, all along a cobweb of dirt tracks running crooked, left, right and centre outside of town, sat back and watched this spectacle of the snow man taking place on the beach. It was the beginning of the story of the day the spirits of the seas and storms mixed their business, and sent elias from out of oblivion into desperance with good reason. This was the story about elias Smith which was later put alongside the dreamtime by the keepers of the Law to explain what happened once upon a time with those dry claypans sitting quietly out yonder there for anybody to  look  at,  and  wonder  about  what  was  happening  to  the  world, and to be happy knowing at least this was paradise on earth, and why would anyone want to live anywhere else. It is important to say straight up that it was no good at all for elias coming  in  from  the  sea  empty-handed  like  he  was,  and  no  good being anywhere with an empty head with even less than ten cents worth of the richness of his own memory anymore. If you put an empty shell in struggle town, or uptown like the prickly bush mob called  it,  expect  a  ton  of  bad  things  to  happen.  His  was  a  lethal combination, he would have been better off being an ant under a leaf if he had zilch left, not even his memory for a bit of a trade. Little  towns  belonging  to  the  white  folks  are  like  this.  You could hear the town struggling to survive, to make good of itself, crying out – Save me! Save me!  But who listened? This was the old, un  answerable question: how the heck were they going to keep themselves out of the water? And, with no disrespect, it is expedient to say at this point, that such little towns are apt to do one thing right, and  this  was  how  a  town  like desperance  shared  a  slither  of similarity  with  others.  You  know,  it  too  sought  glory  in  its  own legends.  A  single,  important  legendary  lore  of  place  developed over a century or two: impossibly hard to reach by land or sea, it cast a spell on those who came, planted them like ground rock, and because there is a measure of love in acts of permanency, they found it too hard to leave. oh!  Fashionable  city  people,  Southern  people  who  like  noise would  say  that  somewhere  north  of  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn  like desperance,  was  just  a  quiet  little  town,  but  if  you  listened  hard enough, you would have heard the silence screaming to be heard. Noise was everywhere, and if there was an original God who had come along with all the white people, who created everything for them, then this place was where he made his music. There could not be a more windy town anywhere in the world of tin flapping, like an orchestra growing louder with age. And they never knew it, or realised, but that music drove those town people half mad. You should watch the wind music for it is the undoer of a man’s toil. The winds. Well! The winds blew over the claypans from other places in the world with no respectful acknowledgment for a town having been built good and proper  in its path. over time, the whirly- whirly  local  winds  composed  much  of  the  new  music  for  the modern times. The winds squeezed through every crack and hole to  loosen  sheets  of  corrugated  iron  for  the  salt  in  the  air  to  rust nails  that  went  pop,  until  all  those  old  pieces  of  tin  whined, whistled,  banged  and  clapped. every  day,  all  day  and  all  night sometimes,  the  town  jammed  jazz  with  bits  of  loose  tin  slapping around  on  top  of  the  mud-stained  fibro  walls  to  pummel  the crumbling,  white-ant-ridden,  honeycombed  timber  frames,  until one day, only paint held up those buildings. This indescribable  concoction  of  rhythms  escaped  into  the atmosphere,  and  was  spirited  away  across  the  continent  to somewhere  else  more  fraught  with  modernity  than desperance. There, wafting into the minds of modern day composers like lights of stardust, inspiring them to create weird, unfathomable orchestral music which the old people now heard on the radio and recognised as  the  uncontrollable  airs  of desperance.  What  a  fright!  They turned the radio off. The  coming  of elias  Smith  generated  an  era  of  self-analysis  not seen  in  the  Gulf  for  a  very  long  time.  The  truth  was  you  had  to think  about uptown  more  carefully,  for  those  people  had  more than one legend about how they got to belong to a place. uptown whitefella  mob  was  full  of  people  claiming  they  had  no  origins. They  usually  met  one  another  on  the  street  with  greetings  like: hey! stranger, where did you come from? They said that they were not strangers because they had originated from nowhere. This was the reason why they contrived the waiting for elias into an honest act of homage to the comings of their forebears. The occasion revealed through this unusual disembarkation of a person from the sea how people like themselves had also once, turned up, appearing from out of nowhere. True desperanians were those blue-eyed, blond, nervy, skinny, freckled types belonging to the old families whose origins in town stretched back several generations, not Johnny-come-latelies – no way. on request, these descendants of the original residents could rattle off from the top of their heads the who’s-who in town, and who  went  six  foot  down  and  under  in  the  local  cemetery.  They could trace back the family line on a sheet of paper or a line drawn with a stick on the ground just to prove they could reach the point of infinity to show they did not exist. Told ya! they would say. Their original forebear, a ghostly white man or woman, simply turned up one day, just like elias. on the scale of things, their history was just a half-flick of the switch of truth – simply a memory no greater than two life spans. There were other little secrets about up town. The town was marked on no map. The up town folk had a dogged nature, and through  their  own  sheer  perversity  had  over  many  decades become  unnaturally  acclimatised,  withstanding  the  tropical humidity  at  heatwaves  so  extreme  in  summer,  their  fair  skin dripped like a tap. They marvelled open-heartedly at having bred a stoical population of backbone which made them a cause célèbre.  And what of? The Pricklebush mob took a good look at themselves. The  old  people  gave  the  little  kids  whom  they  had  sent  into u p town every day to get educated, a job to do. Go , they told the schoolkids, search  through  every  single  line  of  all  those  whitefellas’ history books . The little boys and girls flicked through all the damp pages to find out the secrets of white people. They reported finding not one single heroic deed about uptown. The old people almost flogged those kids for lying about white people, or laziness, or both. how could  you  find  nothing? The  little  scholars  insisted  that  they  were telling the truth . Alright! What else then? Not any religious places of worship so steeped in prayer and devotion the ground was too holy to walk on belonged to uptown. They got no sanctified ground? They got no sanctified ground. Well! It could not be but it was so. Look around and you will see no monuments of brass and gilt, nor any places of high culture and song in desperance. No Mozart, Beethoven nothing! All this stuff  the  cheeky  little  buggers  scoffed. There!  There!  uncrumpling on  the  ground  the  pictures  they  had  ripped  out  of  books. Mistakenly, then, Pricklebush thought their educated children had all  the  knowledge  stuffed  in  their  heads  about  white  people  and started to believe the town had nothing – no culture, no song, no sacred  places.  But  stop  that  fantasising!  Hold  your  horses.  Why? They  were  –  Wrong!  Wrong!  The  town  still  shone  with succès d’estime,   just  because  they  had  rejected  the  vast  majority  of  those ‘Southerners’,  their  own  true  countrymen  government,  who un  believingly could not have cared less. oh! What jellyfishes must live down South who had no affinity with scorching hot days, 365 days of the year. True desperanians  told  the  Pricklebush  people  that  they were apostles of all matters local. Fringe mob, the edge people, said  they  did  not  believe  that.  The  Pricklebush  schoolchildren continued  their  studies,  and  one  day,  came  running  back  from town. These children stood full of themselves in front of the old people and proclaimed loudly, that the folk of up town  could be masters of their own dreams. Yes, like stonemasons, who in a night  could  relay  every  single  stone  in  an  invisible  boundary surrounding the town into a wall so solid it had the appearance of  a  wall  surrounding  an  important  medieval  palace .  But  where were stones to be found in the claypans? In these times it was assumed that any outsider to these dreams would never see the stones of desperance,  if  he  carried  a  different  understanding  of  worldly matters  originating  from  ancient  times  elsewhere.  The  outsider to these dreams saw only open spaces and flat lands. The Pricklebush  mob  saw  huge,  powerful,  ancestral  creation spirits occupying the land and sea moving through the town, even inside  other  folk’s  houses,  right  across  any  piece  of  the  country. Nothing  but  no  good  was  coming  out  of  puerile  dreams  of  stone walls, big locked gates, barred windows, barbed wire rolled around the  top  to  lock  out  the  menace  of  the  black  demon.  Pricklebush decided the uptown boundary must be a gammon one. Then the folk uptown  showed  their  boundaries  which  they  said  had  been created  at  the  beginning  of  their  time.  The  town  boundary  they showed  the  Pricklebush  mob  was  there  and  there,  on  paper.  To prove what they were saying, they said it was invisibly defined on the surface of the earth by old surveying methods, methods long in the grave with the original surveyors, when the original pioneers came along and developed the town. When  the  name  Masterton,  the  new  name  given  by  an infamous State government to change the name from desperance, appeared on all the modern maps, along with contrary degrees of latitudes and longitudes to the old methods, the locals of up town said by their actions – a two fingers V shaped in the air – Go and get  stuffed .  The  town  kept  all  of  their  nicely  painted desperance town signs up and waged an intense battle with the disinterested proletarians  of  the  Main roads department  whenever  they arrived in town with an arsenal of sign-making equipment, along with government trademark ‘silver bullet’ mobile living quarters to spend a few days erecting more Masterton signs. The enraged residents would band together in full force for the town. They took on the appearance of red-faced ogres who threw buckets of verbal abuse and other things, while those government workers who were full of nonchalance, sat around and did nothing until  it  was  time  to  go  away  again.  The  workers  just  went  on humming through gritted teeth, Keep remembering, pay day on Friday . desperanians  ripped  down  any  new  Masterton  signs  the  workers managed  to  erect  and  in  the  process  of  acting  out  purposeful community  pride,  they  hammered  into  the  ground  many  more signs along the side of the road into town just to make sure no one would mistake desperance for the name of some past his use-bydate Southern politician who wanted to plant his ego in the minds of the future generations. Pricklebush complied, by saying they too vomited at the thought of Masterton, to please uptown . With all the official road maps to Masterton regarded locally as some place different, strangers only had a snowflake’s chance in hell of ever finding their way around these parts. Nah! Nah! you got the wrong map, buddy , lost souls were told as they limped up to the single petrol station selling Shell only. uptown never liked to talk  much  to  strangers.  The  impasse  between  the  town  and  the government  led  to  a  high  road  mortality  rate  in  the  red  nevernever land . you is  in  hell ,  Pricklebush  could  have  told  them  travellers,  but name the traveller or the one single tourist who ever goes to the Pricklebush for a piece of advice. And as far as the local hierarchy of uptown were concerned, but never posted anyone down South a letter about it, their town remained desperance, named after the founder,  Captain  Matthew desperance  Flinders.  Needless  to  say, no one in uptown accepted the fact that Flinders was a prize fool to go about saying he discovered a deep water port that turned into a  dustbowl  when  the  river  changed  course,  and  a  century  would pass before the giant serpent ancestral spirit made that track again. uptown  people  said  all  people  were  born  without  lands  and came to the new world of desperance carrying no baggage. When you think of all this philosophy, it was easy to see how momentum was  building  up  amongst  the  wet  throng  on  the  beach  watching elias  Smith,  a  vision  splendid,  walking  in  from  the  sea.  Their teardrops  joined  the  showers  of  rain  which  had  started  to  run down their faces. People became full-hearted, loving the memories of  their  personal  histories,  even  if  it  was  an  aberration  from  a history only as old as the cemetery down the road. But alas for elias, it was not an even-tempered day to be taken on the wings of angels, even if he had been saved from drowning amidst the lure of a sea churning and rolling with storm-shredded seaweed and meadow grass. He could have stayed many fathoms down on the basement of the ocean floor amongst the remains of ancient shipwrecks, lost forever to the tranquil music of thousands of  bits  and  pieces  of  chipped  and  broken  china  –  sugar  bears, yellow chickens, spotted dogs, and pink babies of lost cargo, hanging and clanging against each other, all over the reef ledges in an otherworldly abyss. But poor elias was temporarily blind. His eyes stung from the night  of  lashings  by  the  sea,  and  were  made  worse,  as  he  walked through the waters into straight winds blowing out to sea from the south,  dense  with  the  choking  smoke  from  bushfires  clogging the  atmosphere. one  can  only  dream  if  things  could  have  been different. If he wished for good luck, he might have taken a closer look  at  those  gobsmacked  people  huddled  in  the  misty  drizzle, standing there doing nothing to lift a finger to help him. He might have been better off not feeling so good about himself. Wiser, if he  had  felt  less  like  a  miracle  escaping  the  fate  of  becoming  an ornament of bones, dressed in algae, for little fish to swim about in. If God  had  shown  grace, elias  would  have  seen  all  the Pricklebush  mob  hiding  about  in  the  long  grass,  and  like  one  of those big hammerhead sharks out there in the water, cruising up and down by the beach, instantly recognised the fear in the eyes of the  mob  of  people  huddled  on  the  beach.  A  hammerhead  shark would  have  seen  the  real  way  those  people  looked  at  strangers. elias  by  crikey,  being  half  drowned,  was  no  excuse.  You  should have seen it written up there in thin air above those people’s heads, that if towns like this were granted three wishes a day, they would sharpen up whatever God blessed them with like knives for brains, and as quick as you could say , Bob’s your uncle,  stab one another in the back, including uncle Bob if he was around. A   wiser  man  would  have  dived  straight  back  into  those  grey milky waters and swum off with the receding tide, straight back over the  twenty-five  kilometres  of  mudflats  he  had  come  from,  and  be gone and done with it. He should have thought about that like the edge people, who know off by heart how deluded will-o’-the-wisps from  nowhere  reigned  in  a  glorious  separateness  from  all  other human  kind. elias  should  have  said, hey! it’s  just  a  tiny,  whimsical seclusion of xenophobia, just like all the other isolated apostrophes along the claypan horizon. Since  no  one  in  the  entire  local  history  had  ever  seen  any  one actually  walk  into  town  from  the  sea,  and  the  miracle  was appreciated  by  everyone  gathering  to  watch,  the  old  people worried  about up town’s  ability  to  cope  with  their  uncertainty about new things coming into their lives. It was normal for their approach to fluctuate between confused joy and confused woe and on  this  day  it  was  no  different.  He  could  have  been  what?  An angel carrying the message of the one they called the Almighty? A ghost, spirit, demon or sea monster? or  a man? The closer elias came,  the  more  the  little  cloud  of  people  moved  backwards  to higher  ground. even  the  edge  mob,  standing  way  off  in  their eastside  and  Westside  camps  in  groups  of  their  own  with  their black heads high above the long grass, could hear those up town folk describing to each other the vision splendid as a marvellously hideous other kind. As morning  wore  on,  the  old  people  witnessed  the  cloud  of uptown,  now  unconsciously  grouped  in  the  shape  of  Australia, speaking  more  wholeheartedly  about  the  apparition  in  ghostly terms.  Yes,  it  was  true  that  they  were  saying  what  they  thought, even  acknowledging  the  ghostly  phenomenon  in  realistic  terms. Their children, covered in play mud, looked as though they were part of some kind of ritual. Their ears, tuned like radar, burst wide open when grown-ups said they were witnessing the emergence of an aquatic aura, a God-sent water angel. Without shame, married too, emm! emm! Shocking messages scurried  along  the  long  grass  tracks  about  what  those  besotted women  were  saying,  watching  his  thighs. oh! oh!  Look  at  that! What a sight those golden thighs made, wading through kilometres of  shallow  weedy  waters,  leaving  a  little  feathery  trail  behind  his knees.  Heavens  only  knew  what  thoughts  were  luxuriating  in depraved  minds  about  the  faraway  look  in  his  ironic  Slavic  eyes. The old people had to duck down, look away in shame; they just looked quickly through the long grass at those women with sneaky eyes.  They  gave  long,  slow  whistles  to  one  another  through  the grass,  as  they  watched  the  mirage  of  hot  air  building  overhead, spelling  nothing  but  trouble,  rising  through  the  cloud  like  it  was spurting out of the mega-sized chimney stack of a mine with a very large  processing  plant .  Tell  everyone  their  men  are  blind ,  the  old people  hand-signalled  each  other  above  the  grass.  If  black  could blush, if only. But the steam-making women standing on the beach, downright  proper,  respectable uptown  women,  could  not  escape the spell the mariner had cast on them, simply from looking at his bare thighs walking through water. oh! of course it pained the hearts of the old people who had to  witness  those  sad  women  quietly  remembering  hot  nights  of childhood  imaginings,  when  parents  once  read  them european folktales, where gentle horses went clipperty-clopping through the stories  of  mist  and  fading  images  of  other  lands  and  lullabies. Where appeared from fog, the lone male skater, gliding effortlessly over a  white  ice-covered  lake  with  edges  surrounded  by  sodden reeds, and moaning elm trees drooping heavy with spirits wrapped in cloaks of snow. All of this happened on the water’s edge, after Captain Nicoli Finn – someone else from uptown who also claimed to have originally appeared  in desperance  from  out  of  nowhere  –  had  said  he  had discovered  the  person  walking  in  from  the  sea.  Finn  was  an  old man,  a  local  feature  on  the  foreshore  landscape,  whom uptown commonly referred to, not by his actual name, but as a thing: The crazy whatever!  on the day of the discovery that changed everything in  Finn’s  life,  he  was  engaged  in  his  usual  surveillance  of  the coastline that was now temporarily relocated right next to the town because of the king tides. Finn  was  all  rigged  out  in  his  crazy  clothes.  A get-up   of  full, winter serge, the olive-coloured uniform of the Australian army he slept  and  worked  in,  which  was  commonly  regarded  as  a  public health problem. Perched crookedly on his long, oily, greying hair was  his  sergeant’s  cap.  He  could  have  been  called, Look  at  him , which was what perspiring people habitually whispered in dismay behind  his  fly-attracting  back.  But  when  they  were  smart  they avoided looking at Mr Finn, especially on days that were scorchers, so as not to break out in a terrible prickly heat rash themselves. Since Finn remained oblivious to most things, he never noticed how the long spells of humidity in the air made his unkempt, danksmelling uniform a home for hundreds of nestling moths visiting desperance  after  the  rains.  The  invading  insects  left  numerous holes  behind  when  they  moved  on  to  chew  up  more  of  what  he wore,  before  spreading  their  larvae  like  couch-grass  pollen wherever he walked around town. until one day, uptown made it their business to formally thank Finn for the permanent plague of moths besieging the town. Finn’s career of undercover work, which he claimed he did as an enlisted soldier for the Australian army, was uneventful until the day elias rose out of the waters. every day he followed a set routine. When he proceeded on ‘operation’, he would set off very early in the morning on his ‘secret’ orders to the water’s edge, whatever its current distance was from town. He was commonly seen as a blob moving  in  the  early  morning  fog-filled  atmosphere  covering  the land  that  stretched  right  out  into  the  sea  to  hide  the  horizon between  earth  and  sky.  Head  down,  with  a  stern  expression  of concentration  stretched  across  his  lips,  he  marched  on  up  the beach  in  search  of  signs  to  report  to  army  intelligence.  He  was fastidiously particular about filling the requirement of his cover, by pretending to be a madman in army uniform, but for all and all, he was the inventor of confusion about his actual line of work, and it was hard to know if he was a habitual liar, or really did work for the army. He created a foil by collecting all of the empty bottles lying about the water’s edge. These he would neatly and painstakingly stack  until  they  produced  giant-sized  walls  of  amber  glass  at  the back of the Fisherman’s Hotel. Anyone could go and watch him sitting at the plastic table on a chair in front of the walls of bottles. This  was  where  he  ate  the  counter  dinners  the  hotel  gave  him for free. Before the day elias came and things changed, Finn’s cover was so strong that he could elicit spiteful scorn as easy as you could click your fingers, wherever he walked in town. The women hated him: Don’t  look,  pretend  you’re  not  looking,  but  there  goes  that  old  madman wasting his life again – just like a general fool. uptown matrons, who once looked like kewpie dolls, now voluptuously overfed to sustain their elephantine memories, whispered out loudly behind his back just  to  spite  him  from  across  the  street.  You  could  feel  their jealousies moving up and down the streets of desperance, leaving you breathless for days. Silly old Finn never gave two frigs – he kept on walking, no, he did not walk, he shuffled in a zigzag fashion from one side of the footpath to the next on Main Street, bent with whatever hawks he had  shot  while  hunting  alone  on  the  beach  slung  over  his shoulders.  Shooting  hawks  was  a  useless  preoccupation  and  Finn spent  a  lot  of  time  hunting  the  skies  for  them.  The  sun-frocked matrons in their sun-bleached dresses shuffled by, blood draining from faces like dried pears at the mere thought of having to cross right next to him on the footpath, and as they did, snubbing him with jaws atrembling and eyes glaring ahead. But Finn’s life changed for the better as he stood in his mudcaked army boots on the beach that early morning when the mist was just starting to lift, and the air was still full of red haze. It was at  that  precise  moment  of  the  red  morning,  when  he  would commence  firing,  wasting  army  bullets  on  a  group  of  hawks circling above the sea, as he always did, that he had first noticed the miracle. The birds too must take credit for their part in Finn’s miracle. Finn was affected with the dero shakes, wobbling one way or  another  to  steady  his  position,  as  the  hawks,  looking  down  at him, casually flew out of range. It was a game the birds played with the  army  captain,  flying  in  and  out  of  range,  up  and  down, occasionally one fell foul – a fluke hit – but for years they knew he could not aim straight enough to save himself. It was while he was jerking  himself  around  in  a  haywire  frenzy  to  keep  up  with  the birds,  screaming  at  them  to  keep  still,  switching  the  rifle’s  sights from straight up to the sky to dead level with the horizon, that he made the discovery. For  a  long  time  he  watched  the  man  walking  across  the mudflats  through  the  muddy  waters  choked  with  reeds  at  high tide. Finn knew the lie of the land, and he watched elias making detours past the decades of half-submerged car bodies – Holdens, Fords  and  semi-trailers  laden  with  mud,  homes  of  crabs  and gluttonous  man-eating  sea  fauna.  Finn  wondered  why  the  man seemed unaware that it was the season of the box jellyfish with their long,  stinging  tentacles  invisibly  spread  across  the  surface  of  the water. The man walking through the calm looked almost spiritual to Finn who stood transfixed to the spot, like he too was made out of clay. Poor Finn. Crocodiles, sharks, gropers, stingrays, box jellyfish, stonefish,  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  the  invaders  of  childhood dreams swam around his mind. He heard his head pulsating with voices reminiscing over every single tragedy in uptown fishing or beach  picnic  history.  Voices  saying  they  could  remember  it  all,  as though it only happened yesterday. Living next to the sea was like having tragedy for a neighbour. He watched, half expecting the waters to swirl at any second into a bloody vortex of the man being devoured by a giant sea carnivore. until just as suddenly, as if out of the blue, Finn tell yourself , a distant military voice boomed from his  memory, fright  was  not  right,  or  expected  of  the  one  and  only Australian Army defence force personnel for miles around . At that, Finn climbed  onto  the  top  of  one  of  the  dumped,  empty  diesel  drums left lying around, for a better view through the sights in his rifle, in case he had to shoot. He  swore  on  oath  afterwards  that  he  had  even  heard  music rising out of the waters from a pedal organ playing to him as clear as day. It was God’s music, he had said, and softly started to hum the  bits  he  could  remember. everyone  recognised  the  piece  as Handel’s Messiah , exactly as Beatrice Smith played it on her pedal organ in the solitude of her house, whenever she was overtaken by spiritual light-heartedness. The Captain could not contain himself any further and decided he would have to share the news with the whole town. Forgetting his  limp,  he  ran  straight  through  the  mud  up  to  the  middle  of town, arriving exhausted and out of breath, but still able to muster the herculean strength required to yank the rope of the town’s new bell into full ear-piercing peal, without permission. The large bell had, within months of its arrival, become rusted from the thick saltmoistened  air,  where  it  hung  from  its  steeple  on  the  neat,  front lawn of the new Council Chambers. The first  response  came  from  Libby  Valance,  the  big,  plump town clerk who really should have been the one to ring the bell in case  of  emergency. unless,  of  course,  on  those  days  he  felt  down with  the  weight  of  middle  age  and  heavy  humidity,  he  wanted someone else to do it. ‘What are  you  doing  with  my  bell,  Finn?’  Libby  Valance hollered  as  he  came,  striding  in  slow  motion  across  the  lawns,  to stop Finn yanking the rope. Finn stopped  and  stared,  then  ran  off  back  towards  the  sea, unable to speak, gesturing with his arms for Libby Valance to follow. In no  time  at  all,  with  the  children  yelling  out  about  Santa Claus  coming  to  town,  everyone  in  town  was  heading  down through the yellow grass towards the beach. The children who had been drilled since they were just toddlers in nappies to the heavy ding-donging  bell,  charged  out  of  their  homes,  knocking  each other out of the way, and ran, yelling out, ‘What is it? What is it?’ The kids  stood  close  to  the  edge  of  the  waters  to  watch  the strange  man  walking  across  the  kilometres  of  shallow  mudflats before  they  joined  the  deeper  waters  of  the  ocean  behind  him. ‘He’s  got  mud-curls , ’  they  yelled,  and  the  women  who  had  been transfixed by the sight of his bare thighs replied in muffled voices , ‘That is because he is a miracle . ’ It was the first time anyone in town had seen anyone with dreadlocks. The more practical-minded amidst the crowd announced they were going to find a boat to rescue the man. regardless of all else, they  said,  ‘ obviously  he  will  need  rescuing . ’  They  went  off,  the young men itching to partake in something like a sea rescue, the older men trudging through the mud, half knowing already it was going to be a futile attempt to find a boat in working order. The  trouble  was  that  nobody  went  out  fishing  during  the monsoonal season. All except Norm Phantom, the only real nautical man of these waters, and he was already out somewhere fishing the estuaries. It was the Wet and the town’s boats were sitting up idle on blocks having repairs done. e very motor had been taken apart, and  left  lying  about  on  old  newspapers  in  one  hundred  greasy pieces inside the fishing sheds around town. At  the  waterfront,  prayers  were  remembered  and  the  crowd, some  kneeling,  said  them  out  loud  – our  Fathers,  Hail  Marys, Glory Bes, Acts  of Contrition. By the time the man arrived safe on dry  land,  the  talk  on  the  beach  had  gathered  to  the  height  of wonderment. It was amazing. They agreed that nobody had ever seen  anything  like  this  before.  For  once  something  good  had happened.  Anybody’s  wishes  could  come  true.  What  a  day.  The town stood well back in a circle staring at the man lying face up on the sand and ordered: Give him room. Give him room. You could tell from the look in their glassy eyes that they had placed the richness of prophecy squarely on this man’s shoulders. It was only logical, on  the  face  of  things,  something  good  had  happened,  but underneath  the  mask  of  appreciation,  there  was  also  a  pot  of apprehension bubbling away in their brains. Time passed . ‘For God’s sake you got to tell us who are you?’ Libby Valance, beckoning and pleading on behalf of the town, tried to persuade the unmoving man to speak. The man did not speak. He  asked  in  every  way  he  knew  to  entice  a  reaction.  Suddenly, several others piped up, since they could not help themselves, and answered  Libby  Valance’s  question.  They  said  he  was  a  saviour. The  town  clerk  spun  around  and  looked  at  them  in  disbelief. Libby  prided  himself  in  being  educated.  Blood  drained  from  his abnormally red face. His wife, Maria-Sofia glared at him so hard, he bit his tongue and said nothing. Libby Valance did not give up. He kept trying to work through the  lunacy  talking  in  the  background,  squatting  with  his  portly stomach slumped on his knees, balancing himself awkwardly next to the man lying face up on the foreshore. He tried to be a comfort. A  long  time  passed.  The  sun  shone  directly  above  the  beach  and Libby  thought  he  was  being  singled  out.  How  could  the  sun  just shine  on  him?  He  was  determined  to  keep  his  interrogation  up until the matter was finalised. The wet man could not answer, but continued breathing heavily and seemed in a state of total confusion. yes,  who  are  you? irritated up town  mimicked,  losing  patience. They wanted to go home. The whole situation of the perfect man lying  before  them,  exposed  on  the  beach,  presided  over  by hovering,  plump  Libby  Valance  in  sweating  black,  was  just  too perplexing  a  matter  for  anyone’s  mind  to  chew  over.  They  told Libby to get on with it because they wanted a good answer there and then. Since Libby was useless, all eyes began casting around, looking for someone else to speak to the stranger when a voice said,  ‘Get the  bloody  law  and  order  man.’  All  eyes  fell  onto  Constable e ’Strange,  same  name,  Truthful:  someone  whom  they  had previously  written  off  as  more  than  useless.  The  Constable  stood back, observing everything and everybody in his own tranquil way, loving  the  fact  he  was  living  in desperance,  and  being  totally ignorant  of  his  reputation.  Tut-tut!  Poor  bugger,  a  black  hand signalled from the long grass:  Come quick and have a look at this . The kids ran their index fingers in a circle around their ears. radar! radar! All  disgrace  for  poor  Truthful.  A  policeman without a good pair of local ears? Perhaps it was best to be incapable of picking up all the whispering tongues hissing behind your back. More than a few years ago, the Constable had arrived in desperance but the truth be known, nobody had use for a policeman anymore, so e ’Strange  had  became  very  comfortable  sitting  down  there  at the  police  station  doing  nothing  thank  you  very  much.  In  his abundant  spare  time,  the  mild-natured  law  enforcer  had  created around the grey besser brick building beautiful rose gardens that uptown women now liked to walk in and admire. He spent hours honing  up  his  hoon  town  bribery  skills  with  withered  plant cuttings, to crash the treasured plant collections of all those slackcheeked up town  matrons.  They  had  even  strolled  down  to  the police station in broad daylight to help him transform the barred cells  into  a  hothouse  for Ficus  elastica   and Monstera .  The  plants grew into jungle proportions of twisted vines. It had not occurred to  Truthful  that  if  the  need  arose  one  day,  there  was  hardly  any room left in the building for locking someone up. even  now,  Truthful  did  not  recognise  the  vibes  of  the  town against  him.  He  just  saw  himself  as  part  of  the  crowd.  He  had forgotten he once had a passion for crime. ‘ oh ! Leave him,’ some woman said in a dry, acid voice, typical of the North. The word around  town  was  not  nice.  Whisperings  in  the  ear  claimed  he had been left to his own devices too long. It was plain to everyone that Truthful was not really interested in elias lying face up on the  beach,  a  complete  stranger  who  had  not  said,  nor  satisfied anyone, if he were friend or foe to the town. Truthful kept checking his broken gold rolex watch, guessing the  time.  He  longed  to  go  back  to  his  office,  where  he  spent  his working hours undertaking a personal rehabilitation course with a tax-deductable,  mail-order  counselling  service  which  promised  a one hundred per cent success rate at the end of thirty-six months at very little cost to his pay packet. At times, whenever he appeared out  of  nowhere,  down  among  the  edge  mob  in  the  prickly  bush, trying  to  make  friends,  he  would  purge  his  conscience  to  the  old people .  ‘I am trying to make a new man of myself,’ he explained. He  talked  about  spiritual  journeys,  including  self-hypnosis, exorcism, self-analysis. I ’ll kill the bastard if he tries any of that shit on me , echoed the old people after he left. Above all, the Pricklebush people were scared about what would happen to them after being apprehended  by  Truthful.  But  listen!  This  man  built  for  dealing with  trouble  said  he  had  moved  a  long  way  from  being  a  thug copper  from  The  Valley  in  Brisbane.  He  said  people  from  the prickly  bush  should  think  of  him  as  a  friend,  like  a  true,  rural gentleman  cop.  He  said  he  was  even  thinking  of  changing  his surname to Smith like everybody else in uptown. The  situation  in desperance  might  appear  bad  on  the  surface but  the  law  did  not  fall  into  tatters  just  because  a  Southern Queensland  Valley  cop  could  not  fill  the  shoes  of  the  old  sergeant when Jay Smith passed away. A good man Jay, who had spent sixtyone years one month dedicated to the police service without missing a single day’s work until, after having apologised, he dropped dead. What  a  resignation. everyone  talked  about  it.  Now,  the  numerous dynasties  of  Smith  families  kept  lips  zipped  about  the  town’s  sins. The  town  had  ways  and  means  to  deal  with  pub  brawls,  rape, robbery, assaults, family violence and fraud among themselves. So, up until now, with it being obvious to everyone that Libby was doing such a balls-up of a job, Truthful was free to stand about, looking on with the rest of the crowd gathered around the man on the beach. You  could  see  how  oblivious  he  was  when  the  glaring  started and  the  whispering  began . A  plethora  of  worries!  A  deluge  of  ill fate! There was no joy to be had in not having a proper policeman, and the algae man was still lying on the beach, and all of that hot sun  was  making  people  think  weak  thoughts  and  voices  were raised. Well! Now everyone up the beach from the Pricklebush in the  long  grass  could  hear  the  consternation  of uptown  and  how they could go on. What if  the  man  is  dangerous,  contagious,  riddled  with  all  kinds  of incurable diseases, a violent maverick, or a murderer or a foreigner trying to gain illegal entry? What if he is a maniac and a menace? What if  he  is  a  spy  collecting  data  on  our  confidential  capacities  to defend ourselves? What if he is an alien? up town  was  running  on  hot  air  because  everywhere  else  on earth was sweet: they were changing guards at Buckingham Palace but nobody in the world cared what happened to desperance. Nobody could  laugh  at  these  things  because  aliens  were  a  serious consideration and the town had stories about these aliens that could send  a  cold  shiver  down  your  spine.  There  were  real  people  who could  tell  you  the  stories  of  how  they  had  been  taken  away  for weeks on metallic-disc spacecraft with red lights flashing across the sky, and who knows, they said when they came back, if aliens were invading  the  whole  countryside.  There  was  so  much  space  in  the Gulf, no one would ever know. Those stolen people who acted very sane when they spoke about their adventures, acted like a rabid dog the next. It was  hard  to  get  your  mind  together  when  anything  could land  on  the  flat  lands  of  the  claypan  country,  and  why  not?  The world  was  turning  upside  down,  everything  was  coming  apart when  you  expect  to  see  red  days,  boatloads  of  illegal  people,  sea angels, unhappy spirits of dead people, stinking dead whales, even truckloads  of  contaminated  fish,  turning  up  on  the  foreshore  of desperance. Now, a man had walked in from the sea. The man on the beach took on the appearance of the surreal. The sun had dried the mud on his skin until it curled into creamy milk-chocolate-coloured  flakes.  The  layers  of  seaweed  and  algae flapped with the slightest breeze. Little sea mites crawled through the litter and into the blisters, fêting on his raw skin. The big-eared children listening to the adults talking about aliens were shooed off right back to the school ground. Fetch the water bag , they were told. Which  water  bag?   the  kids  screamed  back,  stalling,  trying  to  be clever . The bloody water bag hanging on the school verandah.  They were told  to  bring  it  back  immediately  with  threatening  gestures, And bring sandwiches for the man, too. Get it yourself , the little bullies answered back at their parents, who seemed to have forgotten it was a school holiday. They were reluctant  to  go  in  case  they  missed  out  on  anything.  They  were ordered off again very smartly with Git,  by fathers known to wallop a  good  punch. off  they  went,  racing  each  other  back  to  town, collected food and water, and were back within minutes. T he semi-conscious man’s skin oozed with blisters and putrid flaking skin. The circle widened because he really stank. His lips were  swollen  and  chafed.  His  eyes  were  squinting  from  his  long exposure in the sea and from all of the smoke coming off the fires. Finn,  who  had  been  pushed  to  the  back,  even  by  the  children, because he was the town’s idiot, felt angry about how he had been ignored. He decided he was not going to act like a mangy dog at the  back.  Why  should  he?  He  was  the  one  who  guarded  the coastline,  why  should  he  be  struggling  to  get  a  look-in?  The Pricklebush  mob,  watching  Finn,  was  coming  alive  for  him, hmmm!  hmmm-ing, We  want  the  army ,  they  jived,  elbowing  each other and grinning. everyone wanted to call out his name – Finn! Finn!  Call out to get the man in the uniform up front there – but they didn’t. People got to know their place. Finn looked around at the noisy crowd. He was the only one among them who knew how to deal with the unexpected – refugees, boat  people,  any  foreigners  seeking  illegal  entry,  how  to  apply mouth-to-mouth  resuscitation  to  injured  aliens.  He  was  the  only one who had a certificate of first-aid training for injuries received from being in a secret army camp. He pushed his way to the front, snatching the waterbag from a child. yes, yes , Pricklebush cheered in their hearts for Finn. He sat down on the ground and held the halffilled bag to the man’s lips, that were cut like strands of cotton, and very slowly, tipped drops onto his tongue. After he considered that the man had drunk enough, he took small bits of mashed-up egg from a sandwich, which he placed in the man’s mouth. everyone watched  and  waited,  looking  at  their  broken  watches.  From  the corner of his eye, Finn saw Libby Valance pull Truthful aside to gee him up on how to interrogate his potential prisoner. Truthful  moved  in  excitedly,  after  all  he  was  the  cop,  but reluctant  anyhow,  because  he  was  thinking  about  how  he  was going to have to move all of the plants from the crowded jail. He stood with his shadow over the man’s face, and started to ask random questions, like, ‘What ship did you jump, Mister?’ ‘What ship did you jump!’ Shocked, Finn repeated very slowly and loudly the question back into Truthful’s face. He muttered on and on about jumping ships, about the pointless need for that kind of realism, about silly people needing to clutch the same old straws in  moments  of  spiritual  elevation  given  by  the  Lord  himself.  He couldn’t  stand  another  moment  of  Truthful  trying  to  muscle  in, and he shouted at him, ‘Stand out of the way, civilian.’ The crowd approved, stood well back, and let Finn take charge. Finn gently  asked  the  man  again  who  he  was,  waited,  then almost jumped out of his skin when the man smiled back and in a low voice said, he did not know who he was. He pointed weakly in the  direction  of  the  bushfires  in  the  south,  and  towards  the  rain clouds far out at sea to the north that everyone was hoping would eventually  bring  in  the  rains  to  douse  the  fires.  ‘I!’  was  the  only word he struggled to say into Finn’s ear now bent close to the man’s head. Those who heard, looked at each other. He got lured into a lost romance in the fish markets of Asia they whispered,  you could tell by his accent . Finn smiled, ‘ of course,’ he kept saying for there was a communication, a very large outpouring of thoughts, flashing like torchlight into each other’s mind, a kind of osmosis that Finn understood  perfectly.  He  suddenly  remembered  Saint elias  from the forgotten distant land of his own early childhood and exclaimed his annunciation out loud, ‘His name is elias Smith.’ oh!  Light  of  day!  It  was  alright  to  be  the  anointed  one,  the guardian,  perhaps  even  the  guardian  angel  of  this  melancholy coastal  town  of desperance. elias  Smith  had  gotten  up  from  the beach and survived. No matter it being a hot town with a freezer full of stored facts, local facts cherished as truths and permanently slung  over  all  those  stooped  local  backs  of  fishy-smelling  people eating  fried  fish  on  Friday  night  in  humidity-flooded  homes  of talking  memories. of   misfortunes  at  sea  in  a  storm,  relived through  the  suffering  of  the  surviving  fishermen  who  moaned through  rainy  days  that  never  stopped,  while  the  landlubbers, dismayed  over  the  cattle  lost  in  flood  or  the  following  year’s drought,  compared  rain  gauges  like  sad  trophies,  which  was  the only distraction to helplessly watching buildings destroyed by salt erosion  and  wind,  if  not,  then  termites,  damp  rot,  or  plagues  of rats, grasshoppers or locusts. Sister! Brother! It was just calamity after calamity for u p town. What else could a person expect before the  reprieve  of  a  lonely  grave?  And  the  manna  from  heaven? Schools of prawns and barramundi never where they should be. Why  not  then  an  answer  to  decades  of  prayers  and  religious devotion  for  things  to  be  better?  All  for  one  and  one  for  all  for God’s  creation  in  a  place  where  the  Lord’s  hand  was  always  at work  in  ways  that  often  defied  the  comprehension  of  the  local people. Why not then – a gift from God? Yes, it was like God had given elias to the town. And it was true because they said: We prayed long and hard to the Lord for help. And prayers were answered. God gave us Elias. over the years elias came to live in desperance, he would tell many stories about himself that rang true with the strong local beliefs of uptown explaining how such a person who had been given gifts of prophetic dimensions ought to behave. ‘How else?’ he asked, after trying to intellectualise his own legend of being dispatched like a letter out of heaven into a storm and surviving all the atrocities of hell. But at the end of his high-faluting pontificating, elias Smith was just like a normal man who found it impossibly hard to believe something special should have happened to him. ‘ No! No! Go away.’ Sometimes he would sulk because homage piled  on  homage  was  like  cream  cake.  A  person  can  only  take  so much. elias vented his spleen in secret places, screaming for mercy, for normality; he thought he was going mad. Correct the Pricklebush for  saying  they  actually  saw elias  Smith  standing  about  on  the claypan in the dead of night screaming his lungs out. Correct the old  people  coming  back  from  a  leisurely  moonlight  stroll  for mentioning they saw elias out there again, gazing at the mid-winter stars. he   was  a  very  strange  white  man ,  they  agreed.  They  built  an identity  for  the  one  he  lost.  All  told,  they  said  he  was  a  man  of ancient ways who was planning his escape route from desperance. He told the Pricklebush elders he most definitely was not . What were  you  doing  out  here  looking  like  a  madman  then? they asked him. He told them he was adding new stars to his collection of  novas  and  auroras.  They  also  sat  with  him  to  count  stars. everything  was  hush-hush  in  the  Pricklebush.  No  one  ever  told uptown a single thing of what elias was doing out on the claypan. You learn a good lesson when you get told, Oh! yeah! And pigs have wings , huh?   Invisible  things  in  nature  made  no  sense  to uptown because of their savoir faire in being Australians. once, a long time ago when they first heard Pricklebush talk like this they kept them out of town for a long, long time. Can’t come in here if you want to talk mumbo jumbo like mad people , uptown said. The old people they had tactlessly taken to calling simple-minded retaliated with a hundred months  worth  of  evil  curses  and  sorcery.  In  the  end,  black  and white  were  both  crawling  on  the  ground  in  reconciliation.  Both saying that they were plain jack of each other. So, the old people said, We have to keep it a secret . This was the reason no one said anything about elias’s nocturnal flights  of  fancy.  About  seeing  him  lifting  up  his  bony  arms, outstretched  palms  level  with  the  horizon,  standing  in  one  spot, swaying from side to side, trying to imitate the flight of a bird or fins  of  a  fish.  Whispers  circulated  only  in  the  Pricklebush  about how  he  looked  like  a  crucifix  ticking  in  the  moonlight.  And  he would  shrug  sometimes,  if  anyone  questioned  him,  as  if  he  too found it difficult to believe in his own story. It  was  always  a  difficult  time  when elias  lost  faith  in  himself. He  was  melancholy  about  being  unable  to  recall  memories  about himself, for instance, his childhood – what of it, where had it been? He became despondent knowing he was not the same as normal people. It worried the uptown folk sick right to the pit of their stomachs  on  the  occasions  of  high  humidity  which  marked  his anniversary  of  coming  to desperance.  This  was  when elias would go around spreading his arms like wings of doubt, saying he didn’t exist, or even saying things like, ‘Why me?’ In town, it was considered strangely funny for a man to be questioning his status as a celestial being. you either are or you are not, and you are , they told him. In doubting himself, he also created doubts about the town’s specialness  in being unlike any other place in the whole nation. A town unlike all the capital cities, or all the towns with radio and television broadcasters, where all the so-called lucky people had a stranglehold  on  the  nation’s  better-class  goods  and  services. ‘Nowhere  on  earth  had desperance’s  specialness  in  having acquired  an  angel,’  Libby  Valance  reminded  the  town  at  the beginning  of  every  speech  he  made.  ‘There’s  no  place  that  gets more privileged than that . ’  He sang the praises of ‘This Town’. The esteemed Finn, now highly regarded around town, had gained a reputation for his sharp sense of predicting and gauging levels  of  humidity  in  the  summertime.  He  became  expert  in knowing elias’s  degrees  of  fretfulness.  When  Finn  sniffed  a change  in  the  atmosphere,  he  would  head  straight  up  to  the Council  and  have  a  small  talk  with  Libby  Valance  in  his  office. Soon  afterwards,  Libby  would  have  eagerly-beavering  people rallying  about  his  clean,  cream-painted  office  to  carry  out  his instructions. In town, aromas of cooking pans would filter out of every kitchen so that everyone felt hungry all day long from the wafting aromas of stews, fried fish, roast beef or corned beef and puddings  all  cooking  at  once.  The  normally  downcast up town, threw off the heaviness of humidity for light-hearted excitement by  throwing  themselves  into  round-the-clock  talks,  meals  and singsongs with saronged hula women – dragging out old favourites like ‘Tie Me kangaroo down Sport’, inventing solve-the-mystery games like if you took four men at sea and only three came back what  happened  to  the  one  left  behind,  and  joyfully  reciting  old prayers and inventing new ones in a shed that served as a chapel. Some other people had a different reaction and gambled by the light of kerosene lanterns on the spare allotment covered in buffel grass  at  the  back  of  the  pub,  betting  the  reasons  why elias  was thinking the wrong way. Talk, talk and more talk, this was when the traitorous eastside mob came into dominance. They made Westside sick looking at the way they encroached onto the spare allotment, blending in their non-stop talk with old Joseph Midnight in front leading the way. Welcome! Welcome!  up town invited those crawlers in. dogs, pussycats, a million flies, all jumped to the spare allotment for talk. Just slowly, surely, the crisis over elias Smith passed. A little something someone said, a dull, little gem picked up by somebody else  who  mulled  it  over  at  home  until  they  could  see  the  light  of day, and a solution was found to add to the endless scroll of truth about elias. The telling of elias’s story as white-haired man, or night-time angel, or crustacean-covered aqua spirit just grew old until one day all anyone remembered was that he had appeared one time, out of the pale blue yonder, and built his own place by himself just like they all had to, and there was nothing unusual about that. Local stories were more reliable than what anyone had ever heard from the  big  shots  on  the  radio.  These  were  the  Southern  politicians who  talked  about  themselves  and  what  they  were  doing  but  had nothing  to  do  with  the  little  people  of desperance. uptown  said nothing good about these people. Although elias never remembered his origins, he was able to acquire other people’s memory. They gave him their imagination. Through adopting their childhood memories as his own, he was able  to  close  the  gap  on  the  past  he  could  not  remember.  The faintest  recollection  he  had  left  of  an  original  memory  was  that he thought he had been thrown on the night sea from a bolt of lightning.  He  was  able  to  describe  in  vivid  images  how  he  had entered  the  atmosphere  at  sound-breaking  speed  and  because his  memory  could  not  keep  up,  it  was  left  behind.  He  told  his story so persuasively he was able to convince people of just about anything.  Nothing  was  said  to  the  contrary,  like  his  having  a screw loose, perhaps. He told the people who gathered around his  hut  just  to  hear  him  speak  that  when  they  heard  thunder warring out at sea they ought to take care . Since one angel was unable to care for all of the sinners of the town, he said,  ‘What you are really hearing is God arguing with the devil  about  bringing  down  other  angels  on  earth  to  fight  the wicked people.’ People believed he made storms come in from the sea to desperance. The way the dark cloudy skies loomed low in storm above the flat claypan country could make you believe elias was telling the truth. He had become almost as crazy as Finn. ‘ Look out!’ elias would cry, running out onto the rain-drenched streets in an electrical storm. The old Pricklebush people looked at him out there in the pouring rain and said he had been bitten by a flea. He frightened uptown by yelling out with his booming celestial  voice,  pointing  his  long  holy  stick  towards  the  heavy clouds, and saying, ‘More  angels are coming.’ It was true how those dark  clouds  stretching  across  the  long,  flat  horizon,  resting  low above the town, seemed as though the heavens were about to break open. Anything could happen around desperance. Alright! We will get out there and draw the covers , and the council workers  drove  out  in  the  Council’s  trucks  to  each  corner  of  the town in the rain and they cast an eye, and threw the invisible net invented  by  Lonely.  Lonely  was  a  misnomer.  Lonely  was  not lonely  at  all.  He  was  just  another up town  outcast  said  to  have  jumped  the  back  fence ,  which,  in  the  language  of up town,  meant marriage  by  a  white  man  to  an  Aboriginal  woman.  Together, Lonely and his wife, Glenny, had twelve kids who all lived together in a noisy little corrugated-iron hut in the Pricklebush, all yelling and  screaming  at  each  other,  laughing  and  crying,  surviving  the good times and the bad, as you do. Anyone had to be plain stupid to call his life lonely just because he did not have a white life. Their circumstances were pure dire straits, you better believe it, and poor old Lonely fished all day long in the estuaries to feed them all. This  man’s  real  name  was  A. d .   Smith,  who  came  from somewhere and died with every single one of his family crowded around his bed. His grave no longer existed because the year he died a cyclonic flood washed out the cemetery. The yellow waters were  like  whirlpools  tearing  through  the  mud,  searching  for  the bodies  of  all  the  old  fishing  men  and  their  wives,  and  when  the arms  of  the  earth  gave  up  clinging  to  their  wooden  boxes,  the coffins  shot  up,  poof,  to  the  surface  and  were  carried  off  to  sea. Sometimes,  the  coffins  of desperance  can  still  be  seen  floating around in the circular currents of the Gulf. Nobody ever had the nerve to haul them in, even if it was their dead Aunty or uncle. You could just wave to them. There was nothing else you could do. If you  touch  the  home  of  dead  people  it  would  bring  bad  luck  for fishing. But what if you knock on wood? doesn’t that cause good luck? There was nothing to be done about the holey cemetery except to put a grader over it and build a new cemetery right over the top. The  disastrous  burial  ground  of uptown  made  people  react  like dog-bitten sailors, demanding that a family had the right to bury their freshly dead at sea, even though the Council’s by-laws had put a  stop  to  sea  burials.  So  much  consternation  caused  by  the heartache  of  fish  versus  pollution  versus  dead  people:  Who  was right or wrong? What were basic human rights, family rights, town rights when the dying called up the Town Council, begging to be allowed  to  be  buried  at  sea?  Nobody  knew  the  answers  to  any  of these insoluble forays of life and death. Nobody could agree about changing  the  law  because  the  bottom  line  was:  What  if  it  meant more bad luck? really! At the back of people’s minds what it really boiled down to, was who wanted to end up being dragged by their dead corpse of a neck by some old rotting-guts reptile living in a submerged  Holden  station  wagon,  somewhere  out  there  in  the shallow waters of the bay? In a vivid dream before he died, A. d .  Smith had envisaged a defence  system  in  the  form  of  a  giant  net  made  of  prayers  and god-fearing devotion – a protective shield, saving the town from a cyclone. The legacy of this dream was glorified every November, at the onset of the Wet, at night, when some of the Council men could be seen congregating in secret. You knew the net was being drawn, because you could see the mysterious flashing of torchlight in  the  long  grass.  In  the  Pricklebush,  everyone  stopped  to  listen when the bush creatures became silent. Crickets and frogs were the guardians of the night for generations of Pricklebush folk. The old people  said,   Don’t  worry .  They  explained  the  men  were  checking their  magic  nails  in  the  fence  posts  in  case  anyone  was  stealing them.  In  early  March,  after  the  Wet,  the  Council  men  were instructed  to  drive  out  again  and  draw  the  net  back  – Make  the town nice. So, they went out to retrieve the net and let the fresh air flow in after the rain. Yes!  Sweetening  the  nostrils.  Beautiful  mango  blossom  scent filled the air wafting down the broad streets into the widely spacedout  houses  and  passing  through  the  many  spare  allotments  in between. And inside sat the lonely spinster women crocheting and knitting  blankets  or  repairing  holes  in  the  net  made  by  seagulls. They  laboured  with  good  works  through  their  winter  nights, gingerly picking out, here and there, trapped morsels of other preoccupied  so-and-sos’  lives  who  were  otherwise  tied  up  with woeful marriages in clammy doonas, until the net was renewed, back to its original condition, and the dry had passed. one day it was decided that elias should guard the town. For no good rhyme or reason, elias had the big job handed to him on a plate.  Why desperance  was  mad  about  surveillance  was  not un exceptional,  because  everyone  in  the  nation  was  crazy  about peace  of  mind.  Sallyanne  Smith,  the  town’s  scribe,  had  been running back and forth to the Shire Council office reminding the Councillors that the town had always had a guard, so they decided elias should do it. Not long after that, old Joseph Midnight tried to have an affair with  Miss  Sallyanne  on  the  sly.  He  said  it  was  in  retaliation  for making elias guard. even his wife teasingly asked him, ‘What? You want to become the guard or something?’ He said if anyone was smart like him they would be doing the same thing. He said he was going  to  steal  her  brains  even  though  everyone  told  him  to  stop wasting  his  time.  To  steal  the  story  on up town,  he  should  have snuck  down  the  white  lady’s  prickled  and  bindi-eyed  backyard, then  with  a  rock  broken  into  her  padlocked  shed  and  stolen  the ‘Book of Books’. Joseph Midnight would be a very useful man to know if he had her books in his possession, the complete collection of the Smith family’s sagas, in volumes wasting away in dozens of dusty cardboard boxes in her rusty old shed. In  those  yellowing  pages  chewed  by  defecating  vermin  lay thousands of blue-inked words describing countless years of hotcollared  Shire  Council  meetings  debating  imagined  threats  of invasion.  The  countless  whorled  words  described  numerous incidents of spyglasses snooping along the unguarded coastline of crocodile-infested, mangrove mudflats lacing the northern frontier. ‘ of   course  everyone  on  earth  longed  for  such  a  landscape,’  she wrote.  Hordes  of  Asians  swooping  down  across  the  Pacific  ocean were screaming, We want it! We want it!  And where was the national military?  In  other  countries.  Southern  states.  Pretty  good  job vermin couldn’t shit on what the Pricklebush had locked up inside their heads. e very day, a job being a job, at precisely four-hourly intervals, elias would drop whatever he was doing to walk the buffel grass, spinifex, prickly bush circumference of town. His best fishing mate Norm Phantom now went to sea without him. It was no use taking him  out  on  a  boat  fishing  anymore,  because  right  on  the  hour, without the aid of a watch, he would start off to his job on the edge of town, even if he had to tread water to get there. ‘ Where  hid  reality?’ elias  asked  in  the  Pricklebush,  yet  who could say what existed in one ordinary coastal town plonked at the top  of  the  nation?  Who  knows  what  wars elias  thought  he  was looking  for?  What  war,  which  war,  in  whose  mind?  Somebody could  have  said, Elias,  there  is  no  war .  War  was  somewhere  else, something  to  do  with  the USA  or  those  foreign  countries  in europe,  the  Middle east or Asia. Yes, all of those kind of things were  just  passing  by,  far,  far  away  from  the  things  people  would talk about in desperance. Years  later,  some  very  unfortunate  things  happened  while elias  was  on  patrol  searching  for  clues  about  what  he  should  be guarding against. There were several mysterious fire incidents in town  –  grassfires,  burning  of  the  Queen’s  picture,  backyards  set alight.  Then  Sallyanne  Smith’s  Book  of  Books  exploded  into  a bonfire when the roof lifted off her shed. on  the very same night, another explosion. The Shire Council office became a gaping view onto the pale blue yonder. And with a simple dong, the toll bell fell off  the  burning  inferno,  flat  to  the  ground.  Who  would  have thought  anyone  would  burn  the  history  of up town?  So  much, thank  you  very  much,  you  could  say  about  the  net  of  security. Arson became a new word for desperance to deal with. By late that night elias Smith’s fate was all but sealed by every adult from up town who had crowded into the stale-beer-smelling Barramundi  Bar  of  the  Fisherman’s  Hotel. even  though  it  was the  middle  of  the  week,  people  had  to  come  to  terms  with  new meanings in life. No one was spared. every flashy up town person regretfully slipped into their plastic raincoats and, trumping and slurping  with  thonged  feet  through  the  deep  mud  to  the  only pub on the main street, silenced countless million frogs croaking in the ecosystem. There was nowhere else to go, no prospering community  centre  in  spite  of  sitting  on  a  Solomon’s  treasure  – the  so-called  mineral  rich  provenance  winding  underground across the Gulf country. Men came marching into the pub in their work clothes smelling of perspiration built on old odours dried slowly over several humid days. There was mud all over the floor of the pub for Lloydie the barman to clean up later. Anyone would have died for a whiff of  fresh  air  and  every  couple  of  minutes  the  townswomen,  who seldom  frequented  the  pub,  sprayed  themselves  with  lavenderscented  water.  Many  who  had  been  directly  affected  by  the arsonist(s)  said  they  should  speak  first.  They  said  they  were accusing elias, it was their basic human right, since their lives had been ruined and they expressed their agreed wish: Let us take him outside  and  shoot  the  bastard. Voices  reverberated  from  wall  to  wall, talking  about: shooting,  getting  rifles,  killing  being  too  good  for  the bastard(s) . everyone  competed  to  be  heard.  Nobody  would  have thought  there  could  be  so  many  ideas  of  how elias  had  gone around  causing  so  much  damage  to  the  town.  There  was  such  a frenzy inside, someone from the edge mob, peeping through the window, eager to get a look, ended up running away whispering to himself, Oh! Spirits , when he saw all the shadows of elias’s accusers, laughing around the ceiling. outside the pub, all the children played in the muddy waters spread about like great shallow lakes. It did not matter to them that it was night-time and they were out in the storm. They were using bedtime  for  running  up  and  down  the  street  in  the  rain,  kicking water onto each other in all the deeper puddles made by car tyres in  the  muddy  clay  under  the  floodlights  along  the  main  street. Their wet bodies glistened in drenched, clinging clothes. only the seagulls hovering in the rain around the streetlights kept an eye on them.  The  parents  were  far  too  preoccupied  to  notice  that  night had fallen, or even that there was a storm brewing outside, but who would have noticed? desperance storms were like second nature to these people. Inside – their hearts and minds were inside. Lively local youths, with girlfriends in tight clothes who were standing  around  hanging  onto  their  jittery  emotions,  watched while pool balls rocketed all over the ripped green-clothed pool table  in  the  weekly  competition.  In  another  corner  a  group  of older, pot-bellied men wolf-whistled moderately at each other’s scores, as they took turns to fling three darts for a bullseye in the comp. Meanwhile,  at  the  other  end  of  the  bar,  people  from  the Pricklebush sitting in the snake pit were stretching to look through a small opening into the Barramundi Bar, watching elias defend himself.  Whispering  back  to  the  others  gathered  behind  them: Poor thing! Poor thing! Wild white-haired elias was standing in front of everyone else, alone, looking proud-faced, everyone talking over him. He never had  a  chance.  What  argument  did  he  have  against  a  stick-up  of prominent residents? He had been speaking all day at one place or another and his voice was dry. No one offered him a drink. Hmm! Hmm! Shameful!  y ester day’s people who could not do enough . Smug faces surrounded elias as they pushed up closer, their voices becoming louder, and he strained to be heard above the racket as he answered the repetitious accusations. But listen! Listen? Quiet, quiet, at the back. Listen. You are not going to believe this but good old elias was telling them straight. Alright! Go for it man. No one believed it. The whole pub became silent when he told them what a total, unsurpassed act of ignorance in  the  memory  of  human  kind  it  had  been  for  a  town  to  have singled  out  one  person  on  which  to  hang  its  destiny. don’t  say? Never heard him talk like that before. And he told them that the town must surely be registered up there somewhere in God’s book of records as being the most ridiculous place on earth. Well! That went down like a lead balloon. desperance had standards. What a nerve, elias. of  course  everyone  got  into  the  rush  to  say  something  after that.  you accusen  me  then,  Elias? everyone  started  screaming  and shouting, taking his criticisms personally, and all pointing a travestyof-justice finger at elias. Jesus, didn’t he know they were the mainstream, and if anyone thought different, they must be the one with the problem?  But the act of a community closing in on itself was not an isolated act particular to desperance alone. Go anywhere, and it was the same, same, same. If only  the  town  could  see  the  power  of  words  at  work,  if  it could have, just for one instance, imagined what it was like to throw words around nilly-pilly, like string to create a confusion, a pile of twists and turns, all jumbled up in a bowl like spaghetti. This was what the strings of accusations did to elias Smith who was thrown out like dishwater by all those good Smith families of desperance. Could he have had the time on his hands to have caused all of the town’s recent misfortunes? Could elias  be  blamed  for  Y.  Pedigree’s  dog  being  driven over yesterday while it was running aimlessly on the main road in  broad  daylight,  and  through  no  fault  of  anyone’s,  except  it being a pure bred inbred born without a brain? you know who we are  talking  about.  or,  could elias  take  the  blame  for  I. damage’s husband  whispering  about  warped  sexual  encounters  to  a  disinterested  brothel  girl  long  distance  from  the  corner  public payphone  on  a  hot  summer’s  night,  and  I. damage  not  knowing how  to  speak  about  infidelity? or,  for  A.  Clone’s  family, you know who  we  are  talking  about ,  with  nothing  on  the  table  to  chuck  out anyhow because the social security cheque didn’t last when every last cent of it was gambled away on pension day? or  last night’s public on-again, off-again love affair of the conservative u . Torrent fuel attendant with the equally conservative B. easy? Soo! you know who we are talking about? of course you do but who speaks against the prevailing view of elias? Mrs C.  Caucus,  the  local  diva  from  down  at  the  It’s  Flaming Hot  Fish fish and chip shop, saved others from speaking reams by saying with a wink of an eye and a ‘Ho! Ho!’ through her side lip, ‘You  know  who?’  She  might  well  have  been  slapping  the  newspaper- wrapped  bundle  of  fried  local  produce  on  the  counter  in front of you. Then adding for good measure, ‘ darling, you’d need to  blame  a  much  higher  authority  making  them  decisions,  than him ( elias), my lovie – if you know what I mean, if I can point to the ups and above for a hint.’ But who?  Who  was  claiming  responsibility  for  burning  the Shire Council office’s records of floods and fires unprecedented in one hundred years of impeccable recorded history of natural and other calamities in the local vicinity? A valuable record, now a flake of ash. or, Sallyanne Smith’s Book of Books? An arsonist! A water diviner! No one rang up, left a message, or came forth to claim the responsibility. No one. And elias Smith could be all of these things. Perhaps,  in  the  fullness  of  time  the  world  would  agree  with desperance. Their verdict that night was that the rest of the world should have elias Smith. He was asked to leave town by the morning. Surely , then, on this day of all days, it was another God-given miracle  that elias  Smith  could  wake  up  with  a  precious  mind  so free of worry, it weighed less than a chookie fowl’s feather. Light feathers  did  fall  outside  of elias  Smith’s  place,  as  he awoke  to  a  beautiful  dawn  filled  with  trilling  calls  from  flocks  of sandpipers  lifting  off  the  mudflats  to  fly  in  swirls  around  and around his tin hut. ‘ These  little  brown  speckled  birds  are  the Limicola  falcinellus ,’ the new schoolteacher remarked at the beginning of his first class for  the  morning.  He  explained  that  the  birds  ‘were  catching  an unusual  collision  of  winds  heading  from  north  and  south.’  He wrote  it  down  in  the  class  journal.  This  act  of  writing  down  was significant since the loss of the town’s records in the fires. It would be the first statement for the new history of the town that would not be  based  on  suspended  reality.  But  the  occasion  was  lost  in  the classroom of mostly missing students. Those few children present leaned their heads on their elbows and would soon be drifting away in their own dream world. Poor kids! Assailed with threats to get off  to  school.  So  little  sleep  last  night.  Birds  were  so  common  to these parts that no one took any notice of them except danny real, the  young  schoolteacher  with  bubbling  enthusiasm  for  the  local nature, who had only been in desperance since the beginning of the year, and it was still the Wet season. everything was new for young lean danny from Brisbane with wire  hair,  who  was  early  to  bed  and  early  to  rise.  He  had  heard some of the gossip in the classroom about elias, but he did not go in for what he had judged was a circus. He was an educated man and  a  kangaroo  court  being  held  down  at  the  pub  confirmed  his belief that country people were just hicks and cretins. What would he  know? danny  was  an  outsider.  The  teacher  chatted  on  about how the birds had glided on unusual breezes, blowing out to sea, south to north, flying on a silver lining. He was just relaying what he had seen as the only other resident to be awake so early in the morning,  when  he  went  searching  the  grasses  for  nests.  He  was new so he could not have noticed that there were other thoughts floating in the vicinity, far above the local grasses of the flat plains. Could every cloud have a silver lining?  Thus it does, it does, elias had mused to himself as he listened to the words in the quiet of the morning,  spoken  somewhere  as  daybreak  spread  over  the  flat lands, now with the season turning from the Wet, a metre above sea level. For some time he stood and looked around the treeless view in all directions. often, during his long residency in desperance, he wondered whether others in the town woke up in the morning thinking exactly the same thoughts as the day before. Not that he really  expected  other  people  to  have  the  same  thoughts  as  him, although such notions would now seem an agreeable proposition, but just say, to wake up thinking the same things as you did the day before and before that, was what interested elias. He wondered if the world could be as though someone had struck a button twice to give the town’s residents their instructions for the day. First, telling him who he was in this flat world in which he had been living and secondly, that the day was good. A   short  memory  was  sometimes  better  than  a  long  one  or having no memory at all and this was what elias Smith thought on the day he left desperance for good. 

Looking  straight  out  of  the  window,  way  across  numerous heaps  of  storm-given  driftwood  stacked  for  firewood,  over the  pungent-smelling  salty  flats  towards  the  water’s  edge, Norm  Phantom  watched  his  friend elias  Smith.  The  first thing Norm thought about elias dressed in his long dark  olive  trench  coat  as  he  headed  out  to  sea,  was how  he  looked  even  more  other-worldly,  like  a  fugitive  from an  other time,  as  though  he  fished  in  an  icy  sea,  instead  of  the tropics. There he was: elias, pulling behind him a bit of green tin, an excuse  to  float  on  water  named Choice.  Who  sails  in  a  boat  called Choice ? Norm  Phantom  watched  and  mumbled  this  question solemnly  to  himself,  just  as  he  had  done  every  time  he  saw elias towing  his  boat.  Sometimes,  he  looked  on  the  scene  of  reckless endeavour in total puzzlement, but mostly, in resigned endearment for  his  friend,  he  had  regarded  it  as  the  finest  sign  of  peace  in paradise. Who was he, Norm Phantom, to say what another man should do? What business was it of his how each man designs to be at sea? Now , for the first time, Norm thought the old grey-green boat resembled  a  sea  coffin,  not  the  piece  of  tin elias  liked  to  float around in at sea. He listened to the sea murmuring to elias, slaap, slaap . even  flocks  of  white  cockatoos  flying  in  a  cloud  along  the beach like an angel with flapping wings, raucously cried for him. The noise chased away schools of sardines, while elias’s abandoned butcher bird sitting outside Norm’s window sang for its feed of fish. The bird’s tune rang out across the grey woodpiles like a flute. Norm knew  before elias  could  begin  his  journey,  he  would slowly lug the boat over a kilometre of muddy shallows towards the inky sea. out there, the sea joined heavy rain clouds spreading to the basin of the Gulf from a weak trough sitting over Cape York. In front  of elias  the yidimil   star  of  the  morning  hung  low  in  the  sky above the dark sea, looking down at the town. Norm looked at the star in the way men looked at a woman who causes trouble in their families. He spat. The stories Norm knew about the morning star would make your hair stand on end like a porcupine. He and elias had spent hours at sea discussing the skies. ‘She is Venus,’ elias said, smiling at his knowledge of stars which the sea had restored to his memory,  while  telling  Norm  excitedly,  ‘who  is  also  the  beautiful Aphrodite  born  of  the  sea.’ out  at  sea,  she  pulled  heartbroken sailors and fishing men to her beauty where they were lost forever. ‘She is a harlot then,’ Norm laughed. elias responded with silence. Back then, in the good times, neither man spoke to the other again  of  stars  or  fish,  neither  the  next  day  or  any  day  following while  they  were  at  sea.  Their  fishing  became  a  silent  business  of intense  matter-of-fact  concentration  so  spooky,  it  even  scared  the fish  away.  The  very  spirits  that  plagued  the  Gulf  seas  would  not have known these two men were in the vicinity. The small tin boat had become a tanker, and when they returned from the sea, both men parted company in silence. ‘ And  yours?’  Norm  simply  asked  one  night  of elias’s  heart, continuing  the  conversation  a  year  later  when  they  met  at  sea while fishing at the same black-blue cod hole. Both were alone, the fish  not  biting,  and  all  that  was  left  was  the  sphere  of  honesty, which felt as close as all of the stars of our galaxy passing above in the  Milky  Way.  ‘And  yours?’  he  remembered elias  had  replied absent  mindedly, concentrating on the line, ‘And yours?’ ‘ elias always believed in his own stories,’ Norm said through his eyes, while his jaws tightened with a sense of resignation, while he continued  to  look  out  the  window  at  the  dragonflies  –  blue,  red, green – flying around elias’s boat. Norm knew elias. k new when elias would have seen the star which had stolen his heart, hanging in the sky waiting, and full of confidence, prepared to follow her signal.  Norm  remained  at  the  window,  resigned  to  watch, understanding  the  wishes  of  his  friend’s  heart,  yet  believing  in the complete opposite to elias – She only comes for death.  In this country, where legends and ghosts live side by side in the very air, inside the Pricklebush home no man, love-forlorn or not,  sets  to  sea  while  the  morning  star  shines  above  their  fishing boats waiting for them. Have you considered he might already be dead? Norm was surprised at the thought. No, he could not be sure as  he  watched elias.  Imagine  if  he  was  actually  watching elias’s spirit. Norm was able to look out his window in the morning and see  in  the  mist,  the  spirit  of  dead  men  pulling  their  own  coffins. Men  whom  people  had  heard  saying  goodbye  to  themselves  as soon as the curlew called. Norm dispelled such morbid thoughts, though he remained fatalistic in his realisation that once his friend followed  the  star,  she  would  pull  him  away  forever.  And  that  was the truth. ‘I suppose I should go down there and bid him farewell,’ Norm mumbled, firmly telling himself it was the decent thing to do – for a friend. eh! That was right: regardless of whether that someone was  pretending  to  be  dead  or  was  really  dead.  But  he  could  not move. The muscles in his legs tightened like his jaws, as though he was  pulling  the  boat  himself,  yet,  he  knew  he  could  not  go.  The town, driven by its own paralysis, determined the fathom of where its  law  dropped  –  and up town  was  watching  hard  from  their houses too, to make sure nothing was interfering with their law. What  was a good law or bad law, huh? Nobody, particularly Pricklebush, could just go out there, and say things to elias, such as  – Don’t  go!   The  Pricklebush  knew  how  rights  were  miniscule. How could anybody, even somebody like Norm Phantom, interfere with  the  boundaries  of  someone’s  fate?  You  want  to  be  called  a troublemaker, Norm? everyone was pleased enough to accept his or her own fate from the natural flowing dominating law of white governance. Who was thinking himself too good to say, say among the black community, whether an individual was going to receive a box full of life’s jewels or an empty box? Norm found he was telling elias all of these things from the window, yet they were pulling the boat across the slimy mud, side by side, as they had done for ages. Then a funny thought occurred to him . ‘You know, I am doing all of  the  talking  as  usual.’  He  looked  across  at elias,  perspiration running down his golden face as he looked back at his boat, and Norm realised there would be no conversation between them again and was weighed down by the heaviness of his heart, while knowing what he had always known, that elias belonged to another world. Gulf  people  have  something  to  say  about  fish:  their  Norm Phantom was the big man of the sea. regardless of the isolation of  country  people,  because  talk  reaches  out  and  grabs  people’s attention  everywhere,  all  nature  of  people  strolled  into  the Fisherman’s  Hotel  just  to  clap  their  eyes  on  the  sea  man  of Carpentaria.  In  sea  men’s  circles,  yarns  of  Norm  Phantom  of desperance were imagined far more than the truth. This was the only man they knew who lived in the world of marine splendour, riding the troughs on God Almighty seas, surviving cyclones one after  another,  following  a  fish  to  where  other  fishing  men  had perished just for the sake of it, and once in a while, returning to port to check on the family, before leaving the very next dawn. What a man! An asset to the town, an asset to his race, mind you. Yet  a  pure  person  can  burn  with  pain. oh!  Goodness  God, helplessness was a terrible thing at times. Norm stayed transfixed by the window, he was like glue, he hardly believed it possible that he  was  losing  the  only  other  person  in  the  Gulf  waters  of Carpentaria  whose  sea  skills  matched  his  own.  But  Norm  stayed inside anyway, watching e lias go. Then,  something  strange  snapped  in  Norm  Phantom’s  mean heart.  It  might  have  been  the  combination  of  the  butcher  bird’s song, the dragonflies, the significance of a crisis having dawned on him, or seeing the nesting swallows that shat everywhere fly out of his roof – because what he decided to do instead of going out and stopping elias, was a much more over-the-top gesture for his loss. For people who never wanted to see the sight of elias again, who wanted to wipe his memory from here, there and everywhere, he would  be  a  consistent  reminder  of  their  law  –  the  good  and  the bad.  A  forgetting  people  would  be  hit  in  the  face  with elias. They would wish life to be normal again, and wish without luck to celebrate  the  stories  worth  remembering,  but  it  would  never  be the same, because when they thought of Norm Phantom and the sea,  they  would  think  of elias.  So! Norm  Phantom  does  not  fish anymore .  What  kind  of  story  would  that  be?  In  this  way,  Norm decided to destroy his legend. He felt pleased: this was sacrifice. This  was  the  retribution  the  town  deserved.  By  crossing  the margin, fudging acceptability, he knew he would end all sense of hope  his  life  gave  to  others. erasure!  A  total  unconditional response for someone who had no heart to call elias to come back. Yet, why not call elias? Norm had plenty of voice for calling out to  the  whole  world  when  he  wanted  to.  He  possessed  such  an enormous voice, the pitch of it could reverberate up and down the spinal  cord,  damage  the  central  nervous  system,  and  afterwards, vibrate straight up the road to the town and hit the bell so hard, it would  start  ringing  its  ear-piercing  peal.  This  was  how  Norm Phantom  reached  whoever  was  in  earshot  when  he  wanted something  like,  ‘Could  you  pass  the  butter,  please?’  Who,  what, jumped  up  straight  and  listened  and  replied  in  shock:  ‘What? Who?  What?  Is  he  calling  me?’  Norm  Phantom  could  have  used those  lungs  of  his  to  call elias  back.  He  could  have  roared  at  the whole town. But, ‘ oh! no, can’t do that,’ he would have said, even to elias  as  he  walked  away.  ‘ one  day  you  might  listen  now!  You know the limits. You can’t go upsetting the white people.’ Protocol! elias. Such an important piece of information, elias, for harmonious living. Many , many times Norm stretched this deep voice down to the elusive shoreline from the very same window, yelling at any one of his  seven  kids  to  get  back  to  the  house  –  ‘What  kind  of  idiot  are you?  Get  in  here!  Can’t  you  see  a  storm’s  coming?’  Always  the world responded. The sea lady bowed submissively, momentarily, she let him say his piece over the roar of her song. If his children did  not  listen  quick  enough,  she  suddenly  drew  up  the  wind, overtaking  them  in  complete  surprise  as  she  threw  her  waves higher  in  chastisement,  slapping  his  children  in  stinging  blows across their arms and legs, enclosing her arms around their brown bodies and forcing them to ride in the rips before throwing them face first, back on the dry sand . ‘What are you fucking  well doing?’ You  should  have  heard  Norm  roar  at  the  sea  and  the  kids  when that happened. Never mind! Why speak up for Norm Phantom? The big, hardnosed  Westside  man  of  house  number  one  had  closed  the  book himself. What did it matter to him? He had not contributed to the decision  made  by  the  ‘good  people’  of uptown.  Westside  always said, We are just plain, simple, Aboriginal people, never been born white, and proud of the fact . Norm always said, We were not like the local mafia , which made elias laugh. He could not become involved, jump any invisible wall of separation, break it down with an axe, just because he, Norm Phantom, should say so. everything was changing. The town was a different place to the way it was when elias had first plopped like a giant cowry shell on the beach. desperance had become a boom town with a more sophisticated outlook  now,  because  it  belonged  totally  to  the  big  mine.  When the mine came along with all of its big equipment, big ideas, big dollars  from  the  bank  –  Well!  Why  not? every  bit  of up town humanity went for it – lock, stock and barrel. The mine bought off  the  lot  of  them,  including  those  dogs  over eastside.  They would  be  getting  their  just  deserts,  Westside  told  those  traitors who ran down to the mine crawling on their stomachs for a job. They were all doing deals. Norm remembered he had told elias that there was no point getting  involved.  But elias  let  himself  be  bought  off  for  a  few lousy  dollars.  Just  to  guard  the  town  from  what?  What  next? Norm  had  asked  him.  Norm  told  him  many  times  what  would happen  once  someone  owned  you.  But elias,  poor,  no-memory elias had forgotten about the fish in the sea. He thought he was on  top  of  the  world.  No  time  for  fishing,  he  told  Norm,  then watched the back of his friend set to sea after Norm had told him it had come as a shock to hear elias had agreed to take on the job of guarding the town. Nobody could have tried more to warn him of the consequences. Norm said he knew things he could not say because of what the mine had done to his family. remember who your friends are elias, Norm had told him enough about being the guard,  although  he  was  mindful  that  when  a  man  spoke  in desperance,  who  knew  where  his  words  ended  up  and  how  they might come flying back to hit him one day. The old  people  in  the  Pricklebush  growled  more  now  about how their words were being stolen by the bad people – Spies from the  mine  going  around  in  the  bush ,  horrible  devils  that  the  gigantic yellow  mining  equipment  scraped  out  of  the  big  open-cut  holes. everyone  talked  about  seeing  the  spy  agents  scratching  about  in the bush. eyewitnesses saw strange men near the river. They were seen  everywhere,  all  wearing  thin  wires  on  their  heads,  driving around  the  dirt  tracks,  looking  at  nothing.  People  said  they wanted to know what those strangers were up to in their bush. You want  to  know?  They  were  picking  up  the  sounds  of  who  knows what, explained the old people. The children did some research in the storybooks for the old people about white men who wore wire on their heads. This was the start of the old people becoming scientify , talking technical talk. your words , the old people had explained, were important now . Your words could end up being a thousand miles up in the sky riding on a satellite disc, zapping across the world on invisible beams. Don’t even  worry  thinking  about  what  beams  are ,  they  said  in  their  stories. Beams  are  things  you  could  never  even  dream  of .  It  was  some  kind  of gadget that can take away all your myall words, transcribe what you say  in  better  language  so  people  can  understand  what  you  are talking about. And then the beam flies on orbiting through space, straight to the boardrooms of rich multinational mining people in Holland,  Germany,  the USA,  even  ‘Mother’ england,  or  who knows where, to listen to you, before you have even had a chance to end your sentence. So, watch what you are saying . That’s why , they said,  a man had to stay quiet like a mouse while he snuck around getting his  cheese  in  the  big  people’s  house . uptown,  hmm,  hmm!  This  was what  they  called  belonging  to  the  mining  company  who  owned speed, and orbit too. The sound  of  the  sea  lapping  tranquilly  along  the  shoreline carried  Norm’s  thoughts  out  to  join elias,  wading  further  out  to sea.  Norm  felt  the  familiar  pressure  of  pulling  each  step  out  of  a metre of sucking mud. The water left trails behind him stretching over  the  surface  like  silver  ribbons.  ‘ keep  it  going,’  Norm  willed elias , ‘keep it going, old mate.’ Soon, both men could feel the other’s presence pulling together on the wet rope, hauling Choice  through  thigh-deep  water,  breathing  in  the  strong  fishy  smell. Seagulls  hovered  over  the  boat  just  as  they  always  did  when  the red-eyed birds followed men to sea. elias  stopped,  eased  himself  into  the  boat  and  took  the  oars. Norm waited, but elias never looked back. He just rowed as if the gap between their thoughts was unbridgeable. And suddenly they had parted company forever. And  when  Norm  had  finished  watching elias  become  a  dot that faded out of his life, he sighed, for that was that then. except a fitting silence did not prevail, for it was no longer quiet in town. The  makeshift,  resurrected  bell  on  the  Council  lawns  started  to toll loud and long, anyone would have thought it was Sunday. Car horns  honked  and  beeped  from  all  over  town  and  Council vehicles  headed  to  each  corner  to  draw  the  net  while  the  mad woman’s organ filled every ear with Handel’s Messiah . The blasted noise lasted for a total of ten minutes. This was how desperance celebrated the last sight of elias. ‘ Jesus let me tell you,’ Norm shouted, ‘what no end of spite on your earth can do!’ With elias  gone,  Norm  thought  he  ought  to  try  talking  to  the Council again to find out when they were going to stretch the net over  his  place.  Westside  mob  in  the  Pricklebush  said  that  they thought there was no reason why the safety net should be stopping short of their homes. Just because of the gap of wasteland, half a mile,  called  the  distance  of  tolerance,  that  surrounded  the  town and where black people were allowed to live on the other side – all Pricklebush people were complaining that they had rights too for the same municipal goods and services as anyone else. ‘Go and be a troublemaker,’ the old people called out to Norm from his front gate,  and  said  if  he  had  any  sense  at  all  like  his  father  had,  he should go uptown and tell them that. Norm came  out  through  the  gate  to  speak  to  the  old  people. He  told  them  that  burning  hair  was  what  trouble  smelt  like because when his father was a small boy with weather-bleached hair, gone tinder dry all through winter, it went up in flames like burning spinifex when lightning struck the rivergum he had been sheltering beneath. Again, Norm repeated the story of his father, exactly how his father told it, copying his old voice, which seemed to comfort the old people, and members of his family: they stood around the front yard and listened. ‘ The tree, you hear me, exploded on impact into a long streak of  fire  that  sent  hundreds  of  arms  out  in  every  direction,  several raced  towards  him,  in  a  vortex,  grabbing  his  hair  and  setting  it alight.  Luckily,  he  was  saved  by  the  force  of  the  lightning  charge that threw him clear onto the soft sandy riverbed. unluckily, it did not rain, and life resumed. running with the smell of singed hair into  the  desert  country,  hiding  in  rocky  hills  and  living  without water. running away  from  the  men  on  horses,  nostrils  burning, sniffing the air, horses snorting, dogs racing with their noses set to the ground, the human scent of fear trapped in the scent of power. ‘In the evening twilight came powerful, strong men, heavy with rawhide  coverings.  He  watched  through  a  pin-sized  peephole between  the  boulders,  moving  pictures  of  leather-skinned  men dressed in leggings and jackets, moving in and out of frame as their horses  danced  through  a  heat  mirage  towards  the  foothills, searching. He caught glimpses of how they sat relaxed on leather saddles,  wore  leather  leggings,  leather  boots,  leather  holsters  for guns and leather whips. Stopping to dismount, horses sniffing the air, stopping – starting again – in  stretto , men rolling tobacco, part of  one  figure  quietly  smoking,  checking  the  cartridges,  spinning the  barrel,  nodding  directions,  taking  a  drink  from  the  waterbag hanging  on  the  horse’s  neck,  cracking  the  whip,  never  stopped cracking the whip as they moved on up the hill. ‘ Paralysed with fear, dry-mouthed, his body remained stock still with his eye squashed against the rock. A pinhole view of the world collapsing  in  a  kaleidoscope,  of  his  parents,  patches  of  bare  body moving into view, blood spraying, men’s trouser legs dripping with blood,  sunlight  flashing  off  knife  blades,  death  screaming  in  his mother’s  voice,  noise  like  thunder  –  bang,  bang,  bang,  cracking sounds as the tongue of the whip flicked by. His body was a lather of sweat and he felt shocked by the feeling of coolness in the mild breeze pouring over his skin that set off the smell of his hair. Like a lizard he slid with the gravel into the dirt and rolled into a tight ball that  rolled  sideways  like  nothing  alive  on  earth  through  a  small opening under a rock ledge. He rolls on until he becomes lodged against the rock face at the back of a dingo’s lair. His mind fights his trembling body until he becomes still like rock, and dirt, and ancient times, and darkness, until his breathing stops and he is invisible. ‘ That,’  said  Norm,  coming  near  to  the  end  of  his  passionate deliberation,  his  ode  to  his  parents’  memory,  ‘was  what  trouble smelt  like.  And  being  lucky,’  he  whispered  to  his  audience,  ‘was when nobody else could smell your trouble.’ Norm had a hypnotic voice,  his  eyes  cast  spells,  he  distilled  memory  like  the  flooding river emptying into the sea. He made people wish they were there when it really happened. He made them feel that it was better to have been alive in the times of the real people, his ancestors. What Norm could do with stories he had practised down to a fine art and glued  it  to  surviving  relics,  like  the  still-to-be-found  fire-gutted ghost  gum  willed  by  providence  to  the  families’  memories  of Westside, where the local pastoralist whipped Aboriginal men and women, the boulders with a peephole view where cartridges were as  many  as  stones  on  the  ground  from  the  massacre  of  the  local tribespeople. Those stories of trouble never lacked lustre in Number one house. Norm often told his sad stories to his listener, an abnormally huge, white cockatoo bird, named Pirate, over their breakfast cup of tea. Just chopping wood for practice, he called it, declaring it was his natural-born right to pluck history at random from any era of the time immemorial of the black man’s existence on his own land. ‘Too true,’ rattled the bird, an enchanter inciting more to be said. The  creature  was  unbelievable  to  watch.  The  more  animated Norm’s  storytelling  became,  with  hands  and  arms  akimbo,  face, eyeballs  glaring  under  his  smooth  face  and  straight  greying  black hair,  the  dirty  sump-oil-and-meat-fat-feathered  bird  either  sat solemn  like  an  owl  in  thought,  its  black  eyes  fixed  on  every movement  of  his  lips,  or  jumped  up  and  down  crying  out  like  a woman, ‘Stop it! Stop it Norm!’  with people running to see who was getting murdered. The disgusting animal usually perched on the back of a chair facing the table back to front, making it easier for him to eat what he wanted from the table. Nobody in the Westside camps was game enough to say a word against the greasy-feathered bird, which had become holy after it went with the pilgrimage to Alice Springs in the 1980s to be blessed by the Pope. To the Phantom family, the bird was  more  than  holy.  Westside  claimed  Pirate  was  extraordinary. Why? The bundle of feathers had appeared in everyone’s dreams one  night  and  insisted  it  had  psychic  powers  –  so  the  old  people declared the bird to be a prophet. The whole  of  Westside  came  to  Pirate  to  have  their  fortunes told. They held their empty cups close to the bird’s head to make it easy for him to inspect the spectacular designs made by the dregs of  tea  stuck  together  at  the  bottom.  Sometimes,  if  the  bird  felt inclined, he might answer, yes ,  no , or perhaps , or anything else from his huge vocabulary which included questions such as – Am i  going to  die? or, Does  anybody  love  me? Without  judging  his  merits,  they considered him to be a truthful bird, even when the truth hurt. But the proof of the bird’s talents came from a large flock of resident cockatoos, thousands of them, flying over the town, screaming in a spectacular,  uncoordinated  chanting, What  are  you  doing  youse bastards?   It  was  thought  to  be  a  miracle  of  the e nglish  language, that simple birds had learnt to talk e nglish too, just like everyone else. When the birds flew around town, magic sparkled in the air, and people raced outside, looked up and waited for the birds to ask them  the  question.  Then  everyone  replied, Nothing!  We  are  doing nothing .  It  made  people  think  that  they  never  knew  from  one minute to the next what was going to happen. ‘ Tut!  Tut!’  the  insufferable  bird  screamed  repeatedly  at  the sleeping  white  dog dallas,  who  unlike  the  Jimmy dale  Gilmore country and western song he was named after, had never been to dallas on a d C9 at night. The dog was such a big fan of country and western music, it had no time to listen to Norm’s stories, as it lay with its back on the dirt floor, piebald belly belly-up, showing its fleas. The bird demanded the same story to be told again and again whenever  Norm  stopped  talking;  its  hunger  for  the  family’s history  impressed  Norm  more  than  his  own  family’s. openly,  he praised  Pirate,  boasting  he  placed  more  faith  on  the  twenty-fiveyear-old bird retaining the family’s memories than any one of his six children, who, he said frequently, had done nothing but let him down.  There  were  really  seven  children  in  the  family  but  Norm chose  not  to  recognise  his  third  and  once  favourite  son  Will. He  was  disappointed  they  had  gone  off  and  married  the  wrong people, and all were gone and had left him alone, except the three girls who had brought their broken marriages and a string of kids home, and the youngest, kevin, who was sixteen. Kevin  could  have  been  the  brains  of  the  family ,  everyone  kept making  it  their  business  of  coming  around  and  saying  to  Norm after the accident in the mine. ‘ What kind of consolation is that for a brainy boy, being rendered a mental retard?’ Norm knew how to end a conversation about kevin quick smart. W ell! i  was only trying to help so don’t get stroppy with me.  And one by  one,  anyone  who  thought  they  could  offer  sympathy  left,  and stayed away. None  smarter  than  your  Kevin ,  the  white  people  used  to  say  all the time about kevin. Before, schoolteachers just about wore the road away, tramping down to the Phantom’s place every other day just to make sure kevin was alright. Mr Phantom. you must keep on encouraging Kevin with his schoolwork now won’t you? they would tell Norm, and he said he was starting to wonder what schoolteaching was all about . ‘Well! What will you be doing if I have to teach him?’ Norm  asked.  He  said  the  family  already  knew  how  smart kevin was.  That  was  the  reason  why  he  was  going  to  school . he   has  to amount  to  something ,  the  teachers  wailed,  biting  their  tongues, trying  to  make  the  family  understand  that  Aboriginal  people needed to succeed, and to succeed they needed to be educated. Norm Phantom reiterated how proud he already was of kevin but nobody needed to make a trophy of the boy either. ‘You do your  job  and  I  will  do  mine.’  By  agreeing,  he  wanted  those teachers  to  make  sure  they  did  their  job  to  help,  since  nobody wanted more than Norm Phantom for kevin to be able to get the hell  out  of desperance,  and  away  from  the  family  too,  for  that matter . ‘ kevin thinks he is way too smart to be tied down to school,’ Norm explained, wondering why the teachers had failed to capture his imagination by just telling him straight that, like them, he could have a good life with lots of money. ‘ I don’t even feel like I belong here anymore,’ kevin complained about why he had to sit around uselessly trying to do essays about books talking about them  white peoples lives. He would look out the window  from  the  kitchen  table  strewn  with  pencils,  paper  and books,  and  see  his  best  friends  enjoying  the  good  life,  standing around in the sun, preparing to go fishing down on the foreshore, talking to the teachers going fishing as well. Later, he would look up  again  from  a  pile  of  Tim  Winton  novels,  to  lock  on  a  last glimpse of their boats crossing the seascape horizon, or would be just out of hearing range of their laughingly spent hours, tinkering over  improvised  outboard  motors.  He  became  the  silent  nonparticipant, listening to epic tales of sea journeys he kept missing out on. He was the warrior most unlikely. Only in your dreams Kevin . They told him of expeditions, where renowned sharks were preyed upon  in  nocturnal  hunts.  Finally, kevin  was  left  only  to  hear stories.  His  essay  on  Tim  Winton  scored  A  plus,  but  you  tell  me, who on earth cared? Then, school days were finished for kevin. When he left with his  friends,  they  hung  around  town  for  months  looking  for something to do. At home, kevin grew into the role of being the unchallenged brains trust of the family. He and Norm sat around for  hours  discussing  television  news,  the  political  state  of  the nation, the way the country stuffed up the wool industry, who was who  in  the  wars  in  countries  nobody  else  in  the  family  knew existed  or  were  interested  in,  because  they  left  the  television  for something in the fridge whenever the news came on. But that was alright. Nobody, in any case, including Norm, expected kevin  would  actually  get  a  job.  ‘No,  look  at kevin,’ the brothers teased, and Norm let his eyes slip over his thin son. He was all skin and bone. ‘Aren’t he the most unco kid you ever come  across?’  Norm  refused  to  have kevin  on  his  boat  even  if he begged to be taken because he was too clumsy. All the family knew  that  if  there  was  something  to  drop, kevin  was  going  to drop it. Gradually , all of his school mates were recruited into the road gangs  working  on  the  yellow  roads. up  the  track  for  weeks  at  a time  mending  chopped-up  roads  after  the  Wet,  Brahman-cross cattle  for  company,  they  drove  graders  and  trucks  for  the  Town Council. They joined the crew sitting on their heavy machinery on the  side  of  the  road,  waving  at  passing  traffic,  waiting  for  the foreman to arrive. There was plenty of work. Too much work. A perpetual round of work, repairing flood-damaged roads hacked to  pieces  by  road  transports  carrying  heavy  machinery  and grinding their way up to the mine, then loaded, returning to the coast,  hauling  the  country  away  to  pour  into  ships  destined  for overseas refineries. ‘ kevin?  You  got  to  be  joking!’  The  works  supervisor  was  a straight-up-and-down kind of man who grew up with kevin’s older brothers and uncles. ‘The Council has no call for kevin.’ everyone in  the  town  and  down  to  the  Pricklebush  knew  that kevin,  the fidget,  would  be  useless  on  a  job  on  the  road. over  on  Westside, kevin’s hands had already destroyed thousands of dollars worth of torches, electric appliances, motors. He must have had a little devil inside his head telling him to take other people’s precious things apart. even  though  the  whole  world  could  accept  the  fact  that  a table must have four legs, if you left k evin alone, it would be on its side  with  three .  Kevin!  Kevin!  Why  did  you  do  that?  u nguarded machinery, instruments strung, screwed or balanced, or anything that operated on fuel, electricity or battery, was no place for kevin. It  would  kill kevin. kevin  would  injure  himself.  But kevin  went down the mine for the money and the bosses took him on because how  would  they  know?  They  did  not  even  pretend  to  know  who fronted up for work from Pricklebush. Inso and donny  were  the  two  oldest  Phantom  brothers. everybody in town said these boys did nothing for anybody except for  money.  They  worked  in  the  mine  from  day  one.  They  were both  hulkily  built  men  who  liked  a  boxing  match  and  dreamt  of becoming professional. once the pub tried to raise money to send them to the State championships. In a ring, drawn in sand on the saltpan, Inso and donny trained local kids to stay six rounds. They fought  anything  from eastside  that  walked  in  sight  of  them  for stealing  their  land.  ‘I  saw  you.’  ‘No  you  didn’t  you  weren’t  even there.’ ‘Yes I was and I heard you.’ White boys, singled out for making racist remarks years before, were flogged. Boxing matches were a menace to everyone. Gangs of youths formed from eastside and Westside and uptown with an arsenal of weapons. on their way home from the pub, you could hear  them  laughing  as  they  roared  by  in  their  four-wheel  drives, up  through  the  muddy  road,  stopping  only  to  attack  anyone standing in their way, or out of their way, or whenever they smelt trouble. Well! enough was enough. The town did not need any of their money. The elders struck when Norm was out at sea. Get out and don’t come back. They took to those drunken boys with iron bars, sticks and weapons, causing a bit of a mess in Norm’s place. But still, the family had kevin, the beautiful last child who had inherited  all  the  brains,  who  Norm  believed  would  never  survive the world in which he was born. ‘Why did God give us this child for?’  Norm  would  despair  as  he  watched kevin  grow.  ‘He  could have been smarter, if he had had better teachers who knew how to teach  someone  like kevin,’  Norm  accused  the  school  when  the accident happened . What was he going down the mine for?  Inso and donny came home to  accuse  Norm,  and  whenever  they  came  home  and  saw kevin, they said openly they could not comprehend how anyone could let him go to work in a mine of all places. But asking questions around Norm  did  not  help.  Questions  about kevin  caused  arguments . ‘What you want to come here picking fights for?’ Norm challenged Inso  and donny.  ‘We  are  not  picking  fights.’  ‘You  are  always picking fights.’ ‘If anybody’s picking a fight it’s you.’ What a story! Inso and donny banged their way out the door of the Number one house, got into their cars, and shot straight back up the road to the Fisherman’s Hotel. My! My! It was astonishing how cold beer rolled down  their  necks.  Hot  heads  cooled.  They  checked  their  gold wristwatches  to  decide  if  this  particular  visit  home  had  lasted  – what? five minutes or less. So nobody  came  to  terms  with  what  happened  to kevin,  and they  just  kept  on  saying  how  brainy  he  used  to  be.  Who,  anyone might well ask themselves, would have given a skinny lad with not one  single  physical  attribute  to  show  for  himself,  a  job  in  an underground mine? It only took one day. He went down the mine on  the  day  he  got  the  job  and  came  out  burnt  and  broken  like barbecued  spare  ribs.  He  heard  the  ancestor’s  voice  when  an explosion  with  fiery  rocks  went  flying  at  him  –  left,  right  and centre. The boy they dragged out of the crush had been rendered an idiot and it was plain as day no prayers would undo the damage. even after the last scab healed nothing could put out the fire in his brains. Call it God’s will, or call it facing the ancestor in the face, or call it someone like kevin knowing darn well that what was in that  hole  would  come  looking  for  him,  but  he  went  in  anyway. Call it coming face to face with yourself and asking – who are you? Call it trouble too. uptown people said it was a tragic accident that should never have happened. Norm Phantom took his son home and blamed the Shire Council because they had refused to extend the net to cover his place. Thinking  about  trouble  always  made  Norm  think  of kevin, and thinking of kevin made him think of fear, and then he would think  of  his  grandfather’s  stories  to  the  bird. kevin  was  one  you would not bother yourself telling the family’s history to anymore. More!  More!  And  the  bird,  true  to  his  word,  as  if  he  could  read Norm Phantom’s mind, had heard more trouble on the way. Now, Norm  could  hear kevin coming along the twisting corridor, not only disturbed in the mind, but drunk too, and it was only seven o’clock in the morning. Norm heard him first, dragging something along the corrugated tin walls of the twisted corridor heading towards the kitchen, then finally, saw kevin running at him, flashing his knife through the air and screaming like a wounded animal. on this occasion kevin was wearing a torn T-shirt covered with fat swastikas painted in blood. The T-shirt was the first thing to hit Norm in the eye and the sight of it shocked him more than anything else, even the departure of elias whom he had just finished watching. ‘Get that thing off,’ Norm barked, ‘before I rip it off of you.’ Norm  thought  he  could  get  used  to  anything  new  in  the  strange world  of kevin,  but  this  was  too  much,  because  if  Norm  said  he hated anything, he hated what the Nazis did to the Jewish people. He had always said it, and kevin should have known better. kevin stopped in his tracks with the knife still pointed towards his father’s face,  but  he  looked  as  though  he  had  received  a  mortal  wound. ‘Why? You ever saw what happened in Germany or europe? How would you know?’ ‘ Jesus! You take the bloody cake,’ said Norm, ‘Get that thing off – I am warning you.’ Norm roared out to his household in his booming voice. You could  hear  him  down  the  road,  even uptown  heard  him,  calling out the names of his daughters, ‘Hey! Girlie, all of you girls. Come out here!’ Norm started to move from the table where he had been sitting with his bird. He wanted the whole house to see kevin, see what was happening in this day and age, right there in his own home. ‘Come and have a look at your brother. Have you seen anyone dressed like that before, like a bloody Nazi?’ ‘ You! You!’ kevin’s spit spluttered everywhere as he looked Norm  straight  back  in  the  eye,  trying  to  block  him  with  his emaciated body from going back into the house to find his sisters. ‘ You’re fucking nothing to me.’ kevin felt hatred for pity, for pity  was  what  pity  gets.  He  felt  betrayed  by  the  family  whose honour  only  he  had  had  the  guts  to  defend.  It  had  been  one hell of a night fighting the ‘enemies’. An incident that had begun out  on  the  claypans  with  a  spilt  drink,  a  piece  of  broken  glass picked  up  and  thrust  through  someone’s  hand;  a  fight  that  had extended  through  the  bush  with  spotlights,  and  the  pursuers hunting  for  the  chase,  and  him  escaping  like  an  animal.  It  had ended  outside  of  the  family’s  house  in  the  wee  hours  of  three o’clock in the morning. Why was  it  that  the  reputation  of  homes  in desperance  were built  on  other  people’s  judgements?  Norm  asked  his  family  to answer this question. Any passerby could say this or that house was nice  because  of  the  way  it  looked,  from  out  on  the  road,  and  be plain wrong about what happens on the inside. or, they could say the  house  next  door  was  full  of  trouble,  or  that  house  across  the street was full of no-hopers, and no wonder just look at the place. But  Norm  knew  a  house  made  its  own  life,  regardless  of  the family who chose to live within its walls. Why was it? ever since the day his house grew to be an eyesore on the landscape, the place felt as though it was always ready for a fight. even  that  night  when  the  white  town  was  trying  to  intellectualise the behaviour of the local demons and blamed it all on elias, wondering if he was a harmless bream, or a town-eating piranha, the outsiders in the Pricklebush were making do with their lot in life and attending to family vendettas. And you know what? Their houses  never  slept.  It  was  not  long  before  the  Phantom  house pricked up it ears and let out an enormous – ‘What’s that?’ Waking households of mothers and kids on Westside who were sleeping on top  of  each  other,  fell  back  onto  their  sleeping  heaps,  when  they heard  who  it  was. only  the  Phantom  household’s  ears  stayed pricked  to  listen  to  the  sound  of kevin  screaming,  running  and falling up the road from his pursuers. The men doing the chasing were the self-acclaimed tough guys gang, from the other side of town.  Now,  they  were  on  Westside  territory,  hanging  out  of their mud-encased Toyota Hilux, and staying teasingly on the heels of their victim. ‘L eft! Left!’ ‘Now right! riiiight! Hold that fucking thing still, you moron.’ The  yellow  beam  from  the  kangaroo  spotter  jerked  all  over  the countryside,  picking  up  images  of kevin  staccato,  then  in  slow motion. ‘What are we going to do with him boys?’ over and over again they repeated the question. They almost ran him over but somehow, the part of his brain which deals with flight functioned sufficiently enough to steer him out of the way. Then, suddenly, someone shouted – ‘Feed him to Abilene.’ This loaded thought caused momentary silence. ‘Yeah! Let’s feed his bony little arse to Abiiiilene.’ As soon as they reached hearing distance of Norm Phantom’s house,  they  started  wolf-whistling  and  shouting  to  each  other, ‘Noooorm. Say sweet dreams to kevin and Abiiilene. o ink! o ink!’ They laughed at the silliness of each other’s jokes. Panic set in – kevin dreaded the name Abilene. They knew, he knew, that everybody in Number one house knew about Abilene. Abilene  was  more  than  a  nightmare.  She  haunted  the  eroded riverbank  eating  herring,  where  the  river  runs  out  to  the  sea.  A true, live wild pig whose grossly overgrown, black hairy body and a  head  filled  with  brown,  rotting  teeth,  roamed  with  her  legend across the whole length and breadth of the Gulf of Carpentaria. Abilene was a merciless killer, hunting down local men fishing on the riverbank. The story was told to little boys by their grannies to  make  them  be  good,  how  the  animal  lived  forever,  and  was everywhere, grunting, stalking and hunting down the local men on a pitch-black night. The story continued to be told. even if it was hearsay. It also had a reality, since living people had actually seen her, amidst the stark, naked proof of flattened grass where carcasses of cattle were found,  or  half  submerged  in  the  running  water.  Nearby,  fencing was destroyed and witnessed: Ever seen the wire stacked up neat on the side of the road like that before?  There was talk that Norm Phantom was the only person alive who had really seen her, although he never said so. But why would he? rumours spread  from eastside  accused  Norm  of  having trained the pig to kill people. Joseph Midnight said Norm Phantom used the pig to attack people he disliked. Like! Norm never liked uncle, who owned that Hilux those young men were now driving after kevin. When he was killed, the Toyota was found in the bush with the car radio playing country and western music for the mess and  what  have  you  of  poor uncle’s  remains  spread  all  over  the place. Made you sick to see it. Joseph started these rumours even though he and Norm were equally related to uncle. ‘Nobody can prove it, but one day, Norm Phantom, people are going to see you for what you are. You are the devil incarnate. A very bad man. You just wait and see.’ This was uncle’s Aunty. When she became a widow,  she  went  bustling  down  to  Westside,  throwing  her  weight around in traumatic grief. She told Norm Phantom off – to his face. The Toyota sat in Joseph Midnight’s backyard for months, even after it was smoked. Nobody wanted to touch it again. For a long time, nobody would even look at the vehicle. Now the boys drove it around. Vendetta, vendetta, such a strange word for the Gulf. The fracas coming off a combination of the jumbled voices of wild men pitching for trouble, making pig noises, and the Toyota’s distinctive  revving,  was  reverberating  from  corrugated-iron  clad wall  to  wall  in  Norm’s  house,  down  through  the  long  curving corridor which resembled the shape of a cochlea inside an ear. Inside this ear the sound grew louder as it travelled, jumping the  puddles  of  water  seeping  under  the  tin,  just  as  Norm  said  it would, in the unfolding years of the house he had designed to have its  own  built-in  alarm  system.  He  mentioned  to  his  wife  no  less than a thousand reasons justifying his security device. She called the unwieldy construction a trap for fleas, crawling around in the hair of rats, whose eggs had fallen with the dust from the ceiling. At various points along the partly roofed corridor, rooms had been erected as the need arose in the family and trashed when called for as well. When the  sounds  of  their  brother’s  terror  raced  through  the corridor  with  increasing  amplification  like  the  pain  of  an  ear infection, the Phantom sisters appeared out of total darkness, from various exit points, like witches spouting steam. They walked out to the front yard together with six or eight dogs running in all directions and barking their heads off, including Norm’s old white one called dallas. It was showdown time. other families gathered up their flocks, and listened while they hid in their houses. ‘Have the first shot.’ ‘No you. You first bitch!’ ‘No, I give it to you first. Go ahead. Have the first shot. Then I’ll kill you.’ That was Girlie, youngest of the three Phantom sisters, just  three  years  older  than kevin,  skinny  as  a  bacon  rasher,  with bright yellow dyed hair in rollers and dressed in a cotton nightie, always  minding  how  she  looked,  just  like  her  Mother.  Girlie  was standing  in  the  middle  of  the  road  in  the  middle  of  the  night, aiming her rifle. She was blocking the Toyota, the jeaned and Bob Marley  T-shirted,  gammon rasta  men  from  the  prickly  bush ghettos  of eastside,  their  own  cousins  mind  you,  all  armed  with iron rods and one or two rifles aimed straight back at her. The other  two  sisters,  more  heavily  built,  always  pregnant Janice,  and  always  flogged  Patsy,  stood  behind  Girlie. everyone said  these  two  girls  were  deadset  –  just  like  Inso  and donny. Standing  behind  Girlie,  in  Nike  shorts  and ed  Simpson  T-shirts, each held their iron bar gripped between both hands. ‘Come on dog, or second thought: worse than a dog. You hear what I am saying? You are worse than a fucking mangy crap dog following  around  sluts  on  heat  all  night  long  with  your  diseased pricks dragging through your legs on the fucking dirt. Shoot first. Go  on  drunken  men  who  fuck  dead  women.  Have  the  first  shot because then I want to kill you dead, so I can watch the crows eat your useless body in the morning.’ The man Girlie challenged to the duel was her own womanising ex,  her  own  cousin  Noelie  whom  she  was  currently  saying  she was  off  with  for  good  this  time,  in  their  off-again,  on-again relationship. Goodness knows how they had managed to spawn four reasonable-mannered children over a decade to date. The Toyota, resurrected from uncle’s  demise,  was  so  loaded  down with  the  weight  of  Aunty’s  rumours,  the  axles  almost  touched the ground. Noelie, a tall young man with a big ego and minimal good looks lost prematurely to liquor, glared at Girlie with her rifle aimed at his temple. ‘Who you kidding Girlie,’ he yelled back up the road, still not able to work out if his Girlie wanted him back dead or alive. But what did it matter: Girlie was not the only fish biting in the sea. ‘Why don’t you come over and see your bloody kids sometimes you useless moll,’ he quipped. He bit his lip about her obsession with mickey  mouse  courses  which  had  taken  her  mind  off  of  his interests. All she talked about was TAFe  this and TAFe  that. And how  she  was  getting  herself  a  proper  education  that  the  useless primary school had not given her. Girlie did not respond. She had handed over his children when he  had  demanded  it  but  she  was  not  prepared  to  give  up  her opportunities. Her ticket out of this dump of a town. Norm agreed, telling her to be done with the gene pool from what he called that scum from over there. ‘You made mistakes, more than most people Girlie, now put it behind you.’ ‘Stop wasting your time and get your black ass over to my dad’s place and do something with your kids for a change.’ Noelie had  forgotten kevin,  who  had  run  stumbling  into  the yard  and  then  disappeared  into  the  darkness.  But,  after  a  few moments, he decided Girlie didn’t look like she was in the mood for  a quick  one ,  which  was  what  she  was  worth  now  he  had  the Hilux.  He  knew  she  wasn’t  worth  taking  on  along  with  her  two sumo-wrestler looking sisters, not when he and his mates were cold plain  sober.  He  liked  the  look  of  Girlie  though,  and  thought  it wouldn’t  take  much  to  get  into  her  pants.  But  it  could  wait  for another night. He would come alone, carrying a carton of grog to impress her with. ‘You win doll,’ he said and backed off, waving the others back, until they had all tumbled into the vehicle. The Toyota threw a wheelie and a spray of mud hit the women. ‘Fuck you,’ Girlie screamed. She took aim and fired the rifle. The bullets sprayed off the sides of the vehicle. Janice and Patsy did a Chubby  Checker  twist  then,  noticing  their  dirtied  clothes,  they decided  to  go  on  the  warpath.  They  screamed  like  wild  women, and were soon chasing the vehicle as it swerved up the road in the slippery  mud  with  dogs  barking  at  the  wheels.  The  big  women slammed their iron bars on the side of the heavenly blue-painted vehicle, until it gained on them, and headed off back up the road towards town. ‘Why you  sitting  around,  man?  Why  don’t  you  go  and  fight? Stick up for the family, man,’ kevin was at the back of the house goading Norm who wanted no part of it. A man was old now. He had  been  sitting  in  the  darkness  enjoying  the  night.  The  cloud cover  had  broken  and  a  bright  new  moon  shone  down  with  so much light he could see his own hand. It had been the perfect opportunity to read the future across the  entire  sky.  He  knew  if  he  could  sit  for  the  rest  of  the  night, examining the constellations of stars travelling across the sky road on their journey to the spirit world which wandering souls must reach  by  dawn,  he  would  be  able  to  read  and  decipher  the messages. But he could not concentrate. Not because of the noise around  the  front.  It  was  something  different  that  forced  him  to stop what he was doing. He could not bear to hear the distinctive motor of the Toyota crying of other people’s sorrows, screaming at him to come around, and have a look. He sat there, stony faced, not hearing a thing. When Girlie  heard  her  brother  screaming  loudly  around  the back  of  the  house,  pestering  her  father,  her  blood  still  pumping with the adrenalin rush from the fight on the road with Noelie, she  switched.  She  wanted  to  kill kevin  now.  As  far  as  she  was concerned, a strike at Noelie could just as well have been a blow at kevin.  She  stomped  around  the  back  of  the  house,  saying  she wished  the  accident  had  finished  him  off.  ‘You  are  nothing  but  a pest to the family kevin.’ She started jabbing kevin in his skinny back, ‘Fight me if you want to fight, you useless bastard.’ A crazy  look  of  madness  made  his  face  twitch  uncontrollably. He  was  not  far  from  a  convulsing  fit  where  he  would  totally  lose himself  in  a  world  that  had  overwhelmed  his  brain.  When  he reached this point in his madness, it disabled whatever skerrick of common sense he might have had even to save himself. She knew she only had to jab him hard once, to send him off into this state of paralysis.  She  threw  herself  onto  his  stick  body,  while  Janice  and Patsy  grabbed  his  arms. each  of  them  took  turns  hurling  him through  the  house  until  they  reached  his  room  and  forced  him onto  his  bed.  Whenever  he  tried  to  get  up  he  was  knocked  back onto it again. Finally, he collapsed into unconsciousness. ‘W ell! He’s either asleep or dead,’ Patsy remarked, and the three  nodded  agreement,  feeling  relieved  that  they  had  restored some  order  to  their  lives.  ‘Lucky  we  are  here,’  Girlie  said,  and Janice grunted as she was apt to do, rather than getting involved in longwinded talking. Tiredness returned, and each went back to their separate parts of the compound to tend to the children who luckily had slept through all of the noise. The night turned quiet again except for the frogs croaking on top of a mud pile every fifty centimetres,  for  hundreds  of kilometres ,  around  the  Gulf  of Carpentaria. 
From out of the dust storm the Fishman drove home. A long line of battered old cars heavily coated in the red-earth dust of the dry country crawled wearily behind him,  leaving  in  their  wake  a  haze  of  petrol  fumes  and dust.  The  red  ochre  spectacle  belonged  to  Big  Mozzie Fishman’s  never-ending  travelling  cavalcade  of  religious zealots,  which  once  again  was  heading  home,  bringing  a major Law ceremony over the State border. Bearers of the feared secret Law ceremony, these one hundred men  were  holy  pilgrims  of  the  Aboriginal  world.  Their  convoy continued an ancient religious crusade along the spiritual travelling road  of  the  great  ancestor,  whose  journey  continues  to  span  the entire continent and is older than time itself. They come and go, surrounded in a red cloud of mystery, travelling along roads where the only sound is the ghostly intermittent chime of a single distant bell, ringing out of the ground, echoing throughout the bushland. The long dusty convoy, passing through the pristine environment  of  the  northern  interior,  seemed  to  have  risen  out  of  the earth.  There  it  goes.  A  simple  other-worldly  in  appearance crusade, that looked as though it belonged to some enchanted agelessness touched by a holy hand. In  the  thirty-car  procession,  moving,  eating,  sleeping,  living in  second-hand  Falcon  sedans  and  Holden  station  wagons  of 1980s vintage, travelled men of every adult age were covered with days and months of dust. They breathed so close to the earth, the night  might  have  mistaken  them  for  the  spirits  of  the  dead. on the spiritual road, which was indeed hard and bumpy, the life of these  vehicles  had  been  refashioned  many  times  over.  In  an astonishing  modern-day  miracle  of  recycling  by  those  spiritual men of Fishman’s convoy who had artisan hands and the minds of genius, using tools and parts found only in nature, all of these vehicles  survived  over  thousands  of  kilometres  of  the  country’s hardest rock and gravel. Aboriginal folk  living  along  the  back  roads  spoke  in  whispers about how they had encountered the half spirits – Men, bedraggled.  They  hid  from  the  dirt-encrusted  cars  with  the  Australian  flag flying from radio aerials all along the convoy. It would be difficult to dispute that the journey undertaken by the Fishman’s convoy was  as  pure  as  the  water  birds  of  the  Wet  season’s  Gulf  country lagoons flying overhead, travelling through sky routes of ageless eons to their eternal, ancient homes. It was this sound they heard one day, coming their way, and bush folks called it the breath of the earth. The clear day into which Mozzie Fishman’s convoy travelled was so different to yesterday on the southern edge of the Gulf of Carpentaria when a dust storm suddenly appeared in the plains country.  It  rolled  down  from  the  skies,  darkening  the  land, howling like dead people in the night, and swallowed up the weight in the heavy minds of these spiritual travellers while they slept with backs against the wind, so they could be released from the bond of months, even years, on the road, dedicated to religious duty. This was  the  story  for  the  journey  passing  through  this  part  of  the country. No one in the convoy had been surprised; the dust storm was expected to appear before they reached home. The  convoy  crested  spinifex-covered  hills,  dipped  into  red rock valleys, curved round the narrow bends, and created a long snake of red dust in its wake. Ahead, the road, a wound cut in the country, was as clear as a day could be for Big Mozzie, who was so happy country and western melodies sprang into his mind from a buried heyday, jumping from his soul out to the world through his steel-grey  beard.  Listen!  He  was  singing  his  favourite  songs  in  a full voice, loud and infectious, on the north wind travelling back down the convoy, everyone laughing. The landscape passed by in a yellow-green  and  red  blur  of  enchanted  spirits  listening  to  the riotous choir of yippee yi-ays  heading for desperance, home of the country  and  western  big  man,  fitted  like  a  stuffed  black  glove  in the bucket seat beside the driver of the leading car. Not everyone on earth knew how the religious leader acquired a  name  like  Mozzie.  Some  small  thing  that  happened  sixty  years ago when he was born into this world can become the hardest thing to remember. His childhood was of times when big secrets grew in families. Nor did everyone know that once upon a time, his name might have been Paul, or something old Testament like Joshua, for it  was  never  said.  It  was  best  to  remain  prudent  and  not  invite common talk about a cultural man like Mozzie. The Pricklebushers never asked how people acquired names. Instead, they preferred the jargon of deference, talking in sentences, like, Nobody remembers any old jingalo trivia about names anymore around here.  Gasbagging talk was what other people did behind your back, whispering if they liked – for it was a free country. This is why the world never fails to astonish, no matter where people live, for there will  always  be  some  who  sink  so  deep  into  the  valley  of  dishonourable pursuits,  and  chatter  amongst  themselves  about  the humble beginnings of the religious and holy, like Mozzie Fishman. one  poor  old  limpy  woman  and  one  ageing  crippled-up  leg  of  a man, who by chance of miracle, lived into modern times. So what if they had conceived a son at their age? This was what people do, they  were  in  love;  there  could  have  been  worse  freaks  of  nature. Ten thousand fish still swam in the bay and as many birds still flew in the skies. If it was not enough for gossip to fall like the blow of a heavy piece of lead, straight on the heads of this one poor, elderly couple, but they soon had more bad humbug to bother them. They were ruthlessly urged to move their sparse household, a dozen times a day. People were complaining endlessly about the old couple with the  troublesome  son  who  was  causing  half  the  mischief  and running  about,  they  claimed,  wherever  he  pleased.  Justice  was nothing.  They  appealed,  but  seeing  there  was  no  use  in  talking, they  would  end  up  talking  less  and  less,  and  in  the  end,  what happened? Well! They were squatting like a pair of dogs sheltering under  one  prickle  bush  to  the  next,  in  little yaji nests,  and  going about  bewildered,  cowering  from  one  nothing  place  to  another. ‘Shameful and a thousand curses too,’ the old couple complained to the big walakuku  humpy people. This was only muttered behind their backs, but the embittered community heard and cursed back. Go  away  you  people! They  called  out  to  Mozzie  and  his  elderly parents.  Go! you are too much more spreading diseases, if you please.  Those were the days of people rushing around mad with too many modern ideas which did not belong in their heads. Strange things  were  said  by  the maranguji doctors  about  the  boy’s  blood being full of boiled lollies. Some people, women in particular, who were blood relatives to the maranguji  men and women, spoke of collision theories which they had formulated over a quarter of a century of card game talk. These women spoke of what happened to  people  if  you  had  seven  decades  of  accumulated  sugar  racing around in your body – like what had happened to the old couple. You could feel the irritability in the air by the way they flapped the cards, feeling the old couple must still be around somewhere, still  there  some  place,  and  would  have  to  go.  Their  impatience was the normal way people of the modern world of the white man went  about  their  business,  the  general  attitude  to  your  fellow mankind’s  acts  of  intolerance.  Afterwards,  complaining  of  the others  who  had  participated  in  that  marathon  gambling  and talkback event, they whinged, Their mumbling and grumbling made you sick . It was no wonder why the spirit of the country was raw with unkindness. The harmless  parents  of  Mozzie  Fishman  moved  obligingly, repeatedly,  only  mentioning  from  time  to  time,  ‘It  was  no  good being so persistently nomadic in modern times for you cannot keep up  with  people,  always  jumping  about  the  place.’  No  truer  word was  spoken  because  jumpiness  creates  a  tidal  wave  of  problems. You  have  no  place  to  call  home:  nowhere  to  send  the  mail. Nomadism was no longer the answer. Wherever the old couple’s boy was seen to be in those miserable days  of  unkindness,  the  spies  in  the  Pricklebush  swore  that  they had  seen  black  clouds  of  mosquitos  swarming  in  his  wake. Wherever  the  boy  walked,  the  Pricklebush  resonated  with  the irritating  sounds  made  by  these  unusual  swarms  as  they  moved around in the air. The boy had to walk somewhere. So, everyone got the chance to see the phenomenon. Mozzie Fishman grew out of his childhood affliction, and not a single  mosquito  followed  him  around  anymore.  He  proudly claimed that he was conditioned by his parents to be ready to move for the benefit of other people. Such tales were alluvium, pay dirt to the roy orbison sunglasswearers who often travelled by nightfall like so many bats, with the windows  of  their  cars  wound  up,  so  the  devil-devil  spirits  of mosquitos  could  not  get  in  and  inject  them  with  the  dreaded encephalitis  disease. Aborigine   people  were  different  now,  they knew  the  scientify  as  well,  like  the  sophisticated  naming  of  what mosquitos  carried  around  in  their  little  bodies.  And  if  mosquitos were bad, the devotees of Mozzie’s convoy would get the Mortein  Plus  out,  like  the  television  advertisement,  and  hit  them  hard between the eyes. The spiritual dreaming  track  of  the  ceremony  in  which  they were all involved, moved along the most isolated back roads, across the landscape, through almost every desert in the continent. The convoy, which had grown with cars of all colours and descriptions, kept a wide berth from the gawking eyes of white people’s towns, Fishman  called  them,  ‘those  who  just  wouldn’t  know  even  if  you gave them something on a stick.’ The men  in  this  moving  mirage  of  battered  vehicles  felt  they had  well  and  truly  followed  the dreaming.  Travel  had  become same, same  and mandatory, as the convoy moved in reptile silence over  the  tracks  of  the  travelling  mighty  ancestor  whom  they worshipped  through  singing  the  story  that  had  continued  for years. The crossing of the continent to bring the ceremony northeast to the Gulf, to finish it up, was a rigorous Law, laid down piece by  piece  in  a  book  of  another  kind  covering  thousands  of kilometres. ‘Start em up again!’ The Fishman’s voice would ring out each morning.  The  men  would  rise  from  the  face  of  the  world  where they slept like lizards, dreaming the essence of a spiritual renewal rotating around the earth, perhaps in clouds of stars like the Milky Way,  or  fog  hugging  the  ground  as  it  moved  across  every watercourse in the continent before sunrise. The convoy journeys were  a  slower  orbit  of  petrol-driven  vehicles  travelling  those thousands  of  kilometres  each  year.  The  pilgrims  drove  the  roads knowing they had one aim in life. They were totally responsible for keeping  the  one  Law  strong  by  performing  this  one  ceremony from  thousands  of  creation  stories  for  the  guardians  of Gondwanaland. The feared ceremony crossed the lost dusty roads of ancient times, running across one another like vermicelli, passing through many empty  communities.  People  in  these  isolated  communities  had simply gathered up all their sounds and left silence in their wake. The  high  degree  of  secrecy  and  sacredness  surrounding  the convoy extended in an invisible radius beaming hundreds of miles in every direction. only an idiot would ask about it. only a stupid person would stand in the way of the approaching convoy. unless, they  wanted  to  end  up  being  drawn  into  the  whole  realm  of  this sacred  business,  for  once  absorbed  by  the  snake  lizard  moving along the roads following the path of the great ancestor, you were hit  with  a  ton  of  responsibilities  that  common  people  could  not even dream about. Whole communities of hundreds of people living anywhere ahead of the convoy ran straight for the bush when they heard  via  the  two-way  radio,  the  morse  code  warning  that  the convoy was getting closer. Must be nobody going to live here anymore. People  quickly  came  down  from  the  skies  where  they  were walking the tightrope of existence and armed themselves with rifles for protection against the zealot mob. Women and kids who were not  allowed  to  see  anything  of  the  convoy  on  the  road  headed straight to the sand hills or ran into dense mulga scrub – covering up all tracks behind them. This was where everyone sat quiet as a marsupial  mouse  not  doing  a  single  anything,  just  whispering, that’s all, until word came at last that it was safe to return home. Not  all  men  or  all  older  boys  wanted  to  be  dragged  away  into  a religious  pilgrimage  that  would  heave  them  far  from  their homelands for endless months, maybe even years. As time went by, hundreds of sick people would have waited on the  hot,  parched  road  for  the  Fishman  to  come  and  take  them away.  They  were  the  ones  who  said  they  had  thought  they  were going through life for what it was and then, all of a sudden, some other  terrible  thing  happened,  and  their  life  would  never  be  the same  again.  Fishman  would  pick  them  up  and  they  would  go  on pilgrimage  to  the  ancestral  resting  places,  until  the  end  came. Fishman treated sick people with reverence. They had his respect and he buried those who died properly, in a sacred resting place. Why? Fishman explained he helped his people because there was no  good  whitefella  government  governing  for blackpella   people anywhere. And the sick pleaded to go with him. When  Fishman  came  across  the  sick  people  waiting  beside the red dust blowing dead spinifex balls up the road, he would stand for a long time on the outskirts, just looking at their ailing communities as though he was expecting the people hiding in the bush  to  come  back.  The  pilgrims  would  stand  around  their  cars watching the wind blowing past the empty houses – studying the lives of ordinary people. The young men tapped their car roofs to the tune of i  got you babe ,  all eager to move on, as soon as the petrol supplies were replenished. It was on these occasions, so close to the empty communities of fellow countrymen, that the Fishman felt a much  stranger,  frightening  sensation  of  what  was  left  of  his  own humanity.  These  times  when  he  stared  into  space  were  the  times when he talked to himself. Mozzie saw visions when he drifted off with the hot temperatures or  the  silence  and  began  speaking  to  himself.  The  men  would overhear  him  saying  things  like  ‘The  skies  have  become  a  sea  of hands.’ ‘There are too many, everything moving too fast and thick like  a  nest  of  worms  twisting,  hands  turning,  convulsing  hands, attacking  the  place  like  missiles.’  Nobody  claimed  they  ever  saw what  the  Fishman  was  watching,  while  looking  where  he  looked, following his eyes glinting in the sun. Some old wise men moved closer behind the Fishman in case, they said, ‘We might capture his line  of  vision.’  They  were  determined  people  the  old  wise  men. There  was  also  a  lot  of  nervousness  in  the  convoy.  But  the  more inquisitive  wanted  to  know  what  he  saw.  So,  Fishman  explained. He said it was hard to keep up with all the hands sliding everywhere, created by a special luminance caught in the fractures of light. He described how he saw hands touching everything in the community. ‘Hands too many,’ he whispered, coughing, ‘running like mice all over  every  dwelling,  trying  to  reshape,  push,  mould,  trying  to make things different. White hands.’ Must be  how  they  would  like  it,  hey?  What  do  you  think? Mozzie always had someone available to give a little back-up commentary. The old wise men were astounded by the vision of white hands. Perhaps it was presumptuous for them to assume they ought to be black  hands  of  black  people  when  most  other  people  believe  the colour of spirits is white. Fishman  would  be  taken  over  by  these  visions,  and  would speak  out  very  loudly,  as  though  they  were  all  witnessing  the monumental event, like they had all been thrust into the front line of  a  war  zone  where  the  attack  he  was  witnessing  was  deafening, and he would be shouting out the bits and pieces of information: ‘See  this,  see  that.’  It  was  as  though  he  could  not  hear  himself speak. And Fishman? He cringed, lowering himself, and stepping back, arms wide, as if he were trying to keep everyone safe and out of  the  line  of  attack.  He  never  liked  what  he  saw  in  the  visions because  it  was  too  frightening,  he  said.  Sometimes  he  saw thousands  of  these  hands  at  work.  He  could  see  them  killing Aboriginal people. He believed the hands belonged to all kinds of white people, some dead, some still alive, and he knew because he was able to recognise hands, that some of those hands belonged to people  who  were  still  living  and  still  sitting  themselves  on  top  of traditional Law. ‘You know what?’ Fishman asked, as he did, before explaining what he saw. ‘No!’ ‘ Their unconscious thoughts have been arrested in a limbo of unresolved  issues  which  must  be  preventing  their  entire  spirits from entering the afterworld. Their hands and thoughts have been left behind. They are locked up in their own injustice.’ These were  the  kinds  of  visions  which  made  the  Fishman decide on new rules. His number one rule was that the convoy was never to enter a community together. He of course never went into a community while on the road. only a few were allowed to go into a community if the purpose served the convoy. Frequently after his visions, Mozzie would complain of chest pains  that  only  affected  him  in  these  empty  human  places.  His followers would begin moving him back to his car, sighing to each other in relief as the other vehicles returned from the community, and  the  senior  men  ordered  the  convoy  to  move  on.  Then, turning to whatever ailing people were waiting on the roadside, Fishman  would  say,  ‘Come  with  me  and  be  released  from  the cages of poverty.’ on the road, Fishman picked up anybody, even if there was no room left in any of the vehicles. ‘Get out and walk,’ he emptied cars of  young  men.  ‘Make  do,’  he  ordered  others.  ‘Catch  us  up.’ Fishman’s visions did not die with the distance placed between him and his men. In the following days on the road the pilgrims drove while  listening  to  the  crying  of  the  frightened  voices  of  the  sick people,  pleading  not  to  be  taken  to  a  whitefella  hospital  where they would be treated rough, like they were strangers: ‘We are not taking you there, we are not going to.’ It was hard to build trust. More times than not, the convoy would stay clear of comm unities they  passed  on  the  roads,  because  visiting  was  too  stressful, particularly on the old people who would dream about what they had seen for days afterwards, about how they saw a whole industry of  invisible  hands  at  work  on  those  places.  By  staying  away  from them, they felt they had won a battle because this was what Mozzie told them. His voice winning down the roads – winning he claimed, over the cold and heartless ambitions of politicians and bureaucrats who came flying in from faraway cities and capitals to destroy the lives of Aboriginal people. They  say,  people  in  the  right  circles  –  academic  people,  who  use their  brains  to  talk  about  such  things  as  cult  movements  –  that there are not many religious zealots as big as the Fishman in the Aborigine  people’s world of today. It might be true. He might be too big, or it might be equally true to say that his reputation was more dazzling and more amazing than the actual man. Norm Phantom,  a  close  friend  of  Mozzie  Fishman,  who  was himself a big man of the contemporary times, said quite plainly he never  wanted  to  have  any  part  of  his  friend’s  convoys.  He  said Mozzie got on his nerves. e veryone knew in the Pricklebush camps that  Norm  Phantom  was  a  follower  of  spirits  out  in  the  sea.  The Fishman,  on  the  other  hand,  was  a  failure  as  a  water  man.  Two minutes  on  a  boat  and  he  would  be  hanging  over  the  side.  But Norm could not deny Fishman his unbeaten title of water divining. The  men  travelling  with  the  Fishman  saw  this  miracle  every  day. He would get out of his car, sniff, and, without fail, detect in the dry air the moist smell of water coming out of wet ground and plants a hundred  kilometres  away,  or  of  a  hidden  soakage  in  the  flat spinifex plains. ‘He never used a forked stick either,’ the Fishman’s followers  bragged  in  the  Pricklebush  contest  of  whose  extraordinary gifts were bigger and greater, but it could have been that he simply knew the country that’s all, like the back of his hand. ‘Fishman is the most uncommonly uncommon person walking alive today.’ ‘So he only used his nose then?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Big nose like Pinocchio?’ ‘No, not like Pinocchio.’ ‘Well! How does he do it?’ ‘He  just sniff the air like an animal.’ everyone had a story to tell of the Fishman this and that. But it  was  not  all  glamour  on  the  religious  road.  He  extracted  a  big price for his pilgrimages into the redneck country of small towns and vast cattlemen acreages where he and his whole shebang were considered  an  affront  to  white  decency.  Pure  white  nanny-goats running down the dry riverbeds and phone callers echoing to each other: Can  you  see  what i   see? dead  keen  to  excite  each  other  up, those  isolated  white  folk,  any  stranger  to  the  entire  continent would  have  thought  Mozzie’s  convoy  carried  a  huge  deadly chimera of a virus from the third world. oh! Joyless one day life turned out to be in the openness of the cattleman’s kingdom, when a  blot  of  strange-looking  blacks  appeared  like  an  eyesore  on  the horizon. Who knew why there were boongs  squatting down on the riverbank?  the  maddened  men  announced  as  they  did  what  they normally did: defended their boggle-eyed kin with rifle fire. This was  why  Mozzie  Fishman  knew  he  could  not  stay  with  the  white people teaching them about reconciliation, and moved the convoy on. He never saw himself as a target and would never get used to the idea of being used as target practice either. All the little country towns, dotted here and there on the back roads, hated the sight of Fishman’s convoy in the main street: dirty people and whatnot. The words about dirty people and whatnot, which travelled like wildfire, spread down the bush telegraph: Of seeing  them  hordes  of  blacks  on  the  road  again .  The  story  did  not  go away like in the newspapers where yesterday’s story was old news. The  what  was  likely  to  happen ,  a  question  of  huge  proportions  and consequences, grew up into big talk, which must be big talk when town people were talking about killing the black hordes. So, there  was  no  bringing  out  a red roses  box  of  Australian chocolates to share around but instead, there were gawking people wherever  there  were  shabby  cars  full  of  black  men  filing  into  a town. All we want to do , the residents chimed to each other behind locked doors in a mighty big hurry, is to guard the decency of cleanliving  people .  They  had  a  respectable  place  and  there  were Aboriginals travelling foot to mouth. Worse than even...? What? A bandwagon full of politicians. Why don’t you go out and blow up the roads when you see people like that coming here? Those tiny town shires spoke hard logic when sunshine was threatened. No, Mozzie’s  life  on  the  road  was  not  easy  and  back  home  at desperance, he was expected to return. As soon as a fair breeze blew in from the south, going straight through  the  Pricklebush  and  out  over  the  coast  to  converge  with the seasonal change of the Wet, there would be someone with an acute sense of smelling no one else had, who might say they could smell trouble coming up the road. how could that be?  There was no reason.  It  might  turn  out  to  be  true  or  it  might  be  some  people were born liars. Trust nobody  was the motto. Pricklebush waited  instead  for  the  red  wall.  This  happened when  the  breeze  picked  up  and  turned  into  a  wall  of  red  dust spanning from left to right across the southern horizon, visible up to  twenty  miles  away  from desperance.  Then  they  really  knew Fishman was coming home. The red wind ran through their homes and the specks of dust gathered from Mozzie’s convoy hit people right in the eyes. days like this stayed around like a rot, and every day the wind would  start  up  again,  as  soon  as  the  clock  said  eleven.  The  wind blew and blew until six p.m. and people with sandy blight in their eyes jumped with relief, as soon as the wind stopped. But still, no one would admit Mozzie was on his way, until one day, a red-ringeyed person, some pea-brain person, for every creed and race has got them – an e astside person – would start to make trouble. You ask yourself, What’s that noise ? And it would sound like a stick being dragged along the ground. And it was a stick. The stupid person was dragging a stick around the ground, making little noughts and crosses,  in  a  full  lull  of  boredom  on  a  sunny  afternoon,  perhaps, Sunday! When, without thinking about it, this person who you had been  watching  and  just  turned  your  back  on  what  they  were doing  for  a  second,  had  gone  and  written  the  name  Mozzie Fishman  in  the  dirt  and  walked  away,  leaving  the  name  in  the ground behind them. It was too late to run over and rub away what was done. What’s that?   Some  old  person  who  could  read english  came  along  and stopped, shocked. He stared down at the ground mind you, and could not believe his eyes. Mozzie Fishman’s name written in the dirt. Soon the old person would be screaming – Come out the stupid person who wrote that man’s name in the ground , who got to have a sound slap over the head , and then he would scrub the name out with his feet  before  walking  on.  But  it  was  far,  far  too  late  by  then.  The deed was done. ever  since  Mozzie  set  off  down  the  south  road  on  his  first convoy, there had been many times when the Pricklebush people thought  they  had  said  their  final  farewell. We  hopes  he  never  comes back , the poor old skinny people said wholeheartedly as they waved goodbye. They were jack of him causing trouble with u ptown. He was  like  a  dumped  cat,  always  coming  back,  always  claiming  the people who had thrown him away. They said they only had themselves to blame for causing their own bad luck. Awful days passed waiting for the conjurer to evoke himself  into d esperance.  The  build-up  in  people’s  minds  was  as though some spell had been cast over their brains. u p and down the  Pricklebush  people  went,  chucking  around  their  suspicions about  each  other  and  casting  aspersions  around  hilly-pilly  with their  hostile  staring  about  what  other  people  might  be  thinking, and cutting up the air into thin little ribbons. Silly people tried to excuse themselves by saying, Oh! Jesus Christ i  never meant to be bad.  But it was too late, you idiot . The change was on the way and one day,  materialising  out  of  thin  air,  Mozzie  Fishman  would  be amongst them again. ‘You  forget  your  troubles  easily,’  Norm  Phantom  was  forever trying to defuse the obsession created by Mozzie’s visits. He often went fishing, sat in a becalmed sea, just to get away from the talk about  whether  Mozzie  was  doing  this  or  was  doing  that.  Calmer people often tried to persuade Mozzie to act normally when he was in d esperance – to stop his outlandish behaviour. ‘You  want  to  stop  running  around  town  like  a  white  man,’ Norm told Mozzie. ‘ But  brother,  it  seems  to  me  you  accuse  any  black  man  in town of being a coconut. I seduce up town. I get them to eat out of my hands.’ Mozzie was a wizard or some kind of magic man with a cauldron of tricks brewing inside his body. Many, many Pricklebush people went up to  uptown and cautioned him, Be quiet about white people . He paid you no attention. you don’t go and tell white people anything. Not the police especially . But no, he went right ahead walking around town saying he was like nuclei. did anyone knows what was nuclei? No. People in the Pricklebush talked about killing Mozzie. ‘Well!’ He explained in wild talk, his cigarette bobbing up and down in the corner of his mouth, saying how, ‘ everyone had to go through me. everyone had to because they were like negatives on a roll of film and nobody could see their picture.’ He said when he joined  the  negatives  up  with  the  great  spirits  they  would  turn positive,  instantly  like  a  polaroid  photo.  The  people  of uptown were convinced something was happening when they listened to Mozzie’s  speeches,  because  they  said  they  felt  the  heat  of  fire burning the side of their faces. Mozzie claimed  he  had  the  power  to  cause  an  enormous nuclear  fusion  which  nobody  on  this  earth  had  ever  seen  before, and goodness knows what will happen next. Whenever he spoke, using  his  grandiose  words,  he  would  lead  people  into  agreeing how he could have been a great President or a Prime Minister in another  life  –  if  he  had  not  been  born  in  the  Pricklebush.  The policeman just stood there listening to Mozzie talk while his babyblue eyes almost popped out of his head. even with full uniform on and a cap on his head it was a waste of money paid for the power of  authority.  Nobody  was  in  charge.  When  the  policeman  came down to the Pricklebush to see what Big Mozzie was up to, Mozzie told him the story about nuclei. He had the nerve to call out that story to the police, while knowing full well the law was being aided and  abetted  by  all  the  governments  in  the  whole  country  –  state government,  local  government,  government  calling  themselves Aboriginal  Affairs,  or  whatever  else  coming  from  Canberra, because who knows by what Act of Law the white man calls himself in his many disguises. All the friends of the law were standing well behind Truthful while he was being set upon by Mozzie. They were hissing  this  and  that  advice,  while  being  forced  to  breathe  in  Big Mozzie’s  words  like  they  were  poisonous  fumes  of  loose  radicals: carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, carbon tetrachloride. All those  poor uptown  people  who  did  not  know  any  better were  really  frightened  of  Mozzie .  We  know  all  about  fallout,  Mozzie Fishman ,  someone  shouted  at  him,  even  though  people  in  the Pricklebush  who  were  watching  knew  the  speaker  did  not  know what  he  was  talking  about.  They  never  knew  where  Mozzie Fishman had been, disappearing and reappearing into their lives. They  thought  he  must  have  been  living  in  a  nuclear  dump  if  he said he was nuclei . But apart from what was happening in Mozzie’s life,  everybody  knew  one  thing,  people  had  a  good  right  to  be frightened about breathing nuclear air and Mozzie should not have brought his radioactive body into the Pricklebush. It was things like this which were the last straw. uptown people started  running  around  telling  tales,  until  the  whole  town  was jumping  around  about  Mozzie  Fishman  making  bombs.  Soon enough, everyone had an expectation rattling in their minds. With a major explosion in sight, old people had their eyes trained on uptown  with  spyglasses  from  the  Pricklebush. Look  who  was  who ordering  the  law  and  order  around . reading  lip  talk,  they  said  to interested  spectators  what  people  were  saying up town.  They said, Get him out of here, get him out, he’s a bloody troublemaker . Nobody could believe their ears, and said they did not think it was that bad, listening to the telephone wire twang in panic for hours between desperance,  and  down  South.  The  children,  who  were  used  to dangling  themselves  along  the  wire,  said  it  was  the  line  that  was hot, that even the mad crows flew off in fright with smoking feet dangling below in midair. No one knew what the earth was being talked about that stopped the night owl from trying to go hoot! de! hoot! at two or three o’clock in the morning. It was such an uppity town sometimes. People united like never before to confront the Fishman with their shiny rifles aiming right at his fat belly button, which looked like a good target, but he told them to forget it. He stared at them with hard eyes. The look he had on his face had not been seen in the  Pricklebush  for  many  generations.  He  said  if  anyone  got  two foot  in  his  way,  he  would  explode  like  the  bloated  carcass  of  a bullock someone had run over, and when that happened he would be more or less obliged to spill his guts right into their faces. All he had to do was sneeze he said. ‘Yes, just sneeze.’ Such audacity.  And  the  crowd,  standing  too  long  on up town’s  hot bitumen  road,  hallucinated  how  they  would  all  die  one  terrible death  of  suffocation  in  the  rotten  stench  of  Fishman’s  exploded guts. only  the  men  on  the  convoy  knew  the  harmless  sound  of his  cough.  A  sound,  similar  to  the  faulty  carburettors  of  their vehicles, came from deep inside his throat all day long . ‘Look out for  unseasonable dust  storms,’  he  warned  as  the  riflemen  began retreating, heading instead to the rifle range out of town, ‘It will make everyone sneeze.’ Before they could move very far, he gave one sharp clap, and their twitchy fingers closed on triggers, with a volley of shots reverberating overhead. When everything calmed down, and he had their full attention again, Fishman said the sound he had just made was the sound of instantaneous death . ‘That was all they would hear,’ he explained with an honest-felt melancholy in his voice which made their eyes twitch  faster.  Perhaps uptown  already  knew  that  the  sound  of death sounded like a sharp clap of the hand. ‘You will die one day,’ the  policeman  warned,  wagging  his  finger  at  Mozzie.  ‘You  will know,’  Mozzie  repeated,  with  a  mocking  sputter  of  spit,  a  little choking, and then silence. only his cigarette continued to glow and burn  on  his  Clint eastwood  face,  whenever  he  inhaled  its  fumes into his lungs. The trouble was Mozzie Fishman was from a different dimension to other people who had to get on with their lives. Fishman should have known too: nobody should lose respect for people who had to get  along  with  others  for  the  peacefulness  of  the  situation.  But, that  was  too  good  for  Mozzie,  he  decided  he  would  stay  in,  or return to his own particular time warp, unable to get it out of his system. The art of compromise was too good for him – to get on with life. No, he lived solid to the past, to relive it all when he came home like a curse. Neither would it take him long to drive everyone else  back  into  the  past  with  him  –  two  minutes  of  plethora  to reorient  Pricklebush  lives  into  the  past  was  the  record  so  far. Two minutes back, and off he would go, harping on the piece of bitumen in uptown about the time when the mining venture was first established twenty years ago on his grand-daddy’s traditional land.  This  was  not  the  big,  multinational  mining  company  which came recently, but an old prospector he was talking about, digging gravel with a shovel. The very  next  thing  which  would  happen,  he  would  come marching  around,  like  in  one  of  them  old  street  marches  –  a demonstration, and people who were just out shopping for the day, would look and say, What is this?  Nobody knew what was happening, or what caused it, since he was acting like twenty years ago was only yesterday  when  there  had  been  so  much  water  under  the  bridge for  everyone  else. kids  grown  up.  Grandchildren  on  the  lap. Mozzie was oblivious to all that. He continued marching along, left – right, left – right, stirring up the possum’s nest, bringing all those painful memories pouring back, if anyone could remember so far back in time. The  old  skinny  Westside  mob  who  went  out  with  their spyglasses,  peeping  through  the  thorny  bush  hideouts  and  in unison tut-tutting, said: Boy! We wish he would just piss off . Insidious nightmare. etcetera. Well!  Nobody  thought  it  was  a  joking  matter  because  his talking caused talk everywhere, big talk, all over the country. oh! Imagine  how  people  felt  when  they  turned  on  the  radio  and  the television  even,  and  there  he  was,  speaking:  talking  on  the  radio about the mine. even the television had his big face on it. Well! Big talk caused no sense but trouble which came along in full force. All the police flew into desperance on an aeroplane for the day to pick up Mozzie Fishman, manhandled him forcefully to the edge of town, and chucked him out like he was nothing. If he  was  not  enough  nuisance  there  was  more  bad  talk  like nobody had ever witnessed, coming out of the fat lips of the Queen of Sheba herself. She, Angel day, had eyes all over the place, even though  she  was  still  married  to  Norm  Phantom  then.  A  lot  of people  said  they  saw  the  wickedness  of  the  devil’s  face  when  she smiled although none had the courage to tell her to her face. old Mona Lisa would have looked like a sour lemon beside Angel day on  the  rare  days  she  put  a  smile  on  her  dial,  laughing  with  her friends when some new man was in town. The old women yelled out to those hussies, haven’t you got a kitchen to attend to instead of sitting  around  ponging  like  backstreet  alley  cats?  Dressed  all  hoity-toity . Angel and her friends laughingly yelled back,  Well! Old women you would know about what goes on in the backstreets . The old women knew what was being said as they waltzed around each other’s homes in the  Pricklebush,  whispering  among  themselves  and  listening  to their rot. ‘He was  like  an  opal,’  Angel  purred  through  red-lipstick  lips about Mozzie Fishman to her other moonstruck friends. ‘No! He’s  not.  He  is  like  a  really  bright  sapphire  shining through the night.’ ‘How come he be like a sapphire when the biggest diamond in the entire world was what he was like?’ ‘ He like topaz too because his very skin look like warm, delicious, golden trickle of topaz.’ ‘Sister , that’s not at all what he’s like. He was for sure all of the precious  stones,  opal,  sapphire,  diamond,  topaz,  all  rolled  into one.’ Perhaps  it  was  the  time  of  year  when  Mozzie  returned  to desperance,  which  coincided  with  heavy  doses  of  pheromones in  the  air  with  the  Wet.  They  held  open  their  hands  to  show  a small innocuous looking insect. It was, they said, the secretions of this insect which caused younger women to become downright obsequious,  although  the  unctuous  charms  of  Mozzie  Fishman were  known  across  the  continent,  and  perhaps  he  had  an unhallowed  relationship  with  all  the  insects  of  the  earth.  To those who could speak of moments in life shared intimately with another, if briefly (who could ask for more?), he shone. It was word of  mouth  which  created  this  jewel  of  the  imagination  with  its refracting beams of light so intoxicating for the female eye, swelling with  unrequited  emotional  longing  for  the  experience  of  the celebrated shared moment, more or less. Mozzie believed he tried no harder than other men to have women love him, but for some extraordinary reason, he was unable to deny that he was a beacon of  light  in  the  fog  of  men,  flickering  brighter  than  any  other sojourner to desperance, loitering in the Pricklebush of religious and political fanatics, evangelists, bigots, shamans, philistines, and passing-by self-appointed gurus. Angel’s philandering did not stop the petulant Norm Phantom and  Big  Mozzie  from  being  the  best  of  friends.  All  the  confused mummies  told  their  children  that  both uncles  were  the  brightest shining stars flown in from the night sky for the people of earth. Stories,  stories,  the  truth  became  so  blurred,  except  the  owl  with big  eyes  saw  everything  in  the  night:  all  sorts  of  people  were visiting each other, whenever they got half the chance. But who was anybody to butt in and dispute anything a big woman wanted to  tell  her  children?  The  world  would  be  a  very  sad  place,  little children would be lost, if they could not believe in the fantasy of a mother’s story. Whereas Big Mozzie with the Clint eastwood face was nothing but a bag of bones standing tall in an ancient pair of dusty r . M. Williams  boots,  Norm  Phantom  was  physically  and  intellectually the bigger man. Their friendship grew out of Big Mozzie’s drive over  those  other  competing  religious  freaks  who  turned  up regularly to the Phantom household with their fugitive attempts to exorcise the demon, or the snake spirit, whatever it was, living beneath Angel’s house. The Phantom  house  took  regular  forays  into  other-worldly matters.  There  had  been  moments  of  magic,  precise  times  of exorcism, countless days of solemn prayers and undying reverence. A Catholic priest, Father danny, drove into the Gulf one year and in the back of his car he had one thousand little crucifixes which were erected all through the house, and around it outside, and he left them there for a month. The biggest discovery the priest made was that the Phantom family were the clumsiest people alive. They knocked  the  crosses  over  whenever  they  moved,  and  the  priest observed that not one member of the family was able to walk in a straight  line.  ‘Tell  him  to  get  this  stuff  out  of  here,’  Norm  told Angel who had insisted on these matters. She told the priest to take the  obstacle  course  away,  and  blamed  Norm  when  the  exorcism never worked. Then she  got  a  guru  man  to  start  hanging  around.  It  was  a mystery in the Pricklebush how she managed to find these people who kept turning up at her door. everyone watched as the blondhaired guru seemed to slide around like an angel in white gowns over  at  the  Phantoms’  place.  He  left  out  a  piece  of  bread  for  the devil  every  day  for  months,  bashing  a  drum  and  chanting, sometimes up to eighteen hours a day. Norm’s family did not like that either. The kids ate the bread before the spirit had a chance to get to it. At night, under the guru’s instructions, Angel made all her children go outside and beat the ground with sticks, without fail, whatever.  Nothing  worked.  The  only  result  was  that  the  lurking spirit bestowed generously on all of the religious visitors a strange will  to  hang  about,  wearing  out  their  welcome,  until  Norm  had them evicted. All of the fanciful and fanatical became driven with obsessions like those that kept driving Mozzie Fishman, kept him dreaming of coming home to d esperance alive, to be shackled to her skirts, and to plead to be freed. This was until one day, even with his strong connection to the spirit world under Norm’s house, his neediness for acceptance by Norm,  his  passionate  heart  for  Norm’s  Angel  who  caused  only calamity for devoted men, when who would have thought Mozzie’s heart  would  be  broken  –  Well  it  was!  Whoosh!  out  the  door.  So much came unstuck from a heart torn to shreds. She said her piece to  Norm  like  a  whirly  wind  whistling  across  the  flat,  everything flying  in  sight,  smack!  smack!  then  she  was  gone.  A  middle-aged woman, run off with a… Mozzie told Norm he could barely conjure up the vision, it was so disgusting, how a woman so magnificent in every way, who spun gold from the rubbish dump, could have stooped so low. To take up honky-tonking  probably in the animal bar , who knows where, run off, with a thing, worse than any useless thing he could think of, not even a white man, but a fake. Not just one of those New-Age selfstyled guru people who came looking to exorcise her demon. It was sorrowful. The so-called winner, a common black man, a coconut, even had the audacity to call himself, uncle Tom. So additionally , he said of those times, what he had in common with Norm Phantom was  shared  devastation,  although  it  was  truer  to  say,  Norm Phantom  never  lost  a  moment  of  his  time  to  her  memory.  When she left he told the kids she had run away with a money spider. ‘What for?’ ‘ To chase the spider.’ ‘ did you run after her?’ ‘Sure, I did.’ ‘Where did she go?’ ‘ A house full of spiders.’ There were lies in the Pricklebush and life was a mess when two of  the  biggest  men  around  had  been  jilted  for  a  gladbag  full  of whatever had drifted into everyone’s lives from the global winds of the  world’s  religions  –  Apache,  Hindu,  Buddhist,  Jew,  doesn’t matter  what  else.  Five  minutes  worth  of  each,  the  wise  men  said. The old women wept for the man with no shame, running for grog, the  white  man’s  piss  they  fed  by  the  bucketful  to  poison  the Pricklebush folk. They said nothing about Angel. It was the modern man’s dream of the Mona Lisa clawing at his heart which caused Big Mozzie to cry like a baby over many hundred kilometres of road. The  novices  plucked  like  desert  flowers  to  be  taken  aboard  the motorcade  community  initially  found  the  name  to  be  highly deceptive.  They  had  difficulty  with  the  idea  that  nothing  in  Big Mozzie Fishman’s world was how it appeared. Big Mozzie growled at the newcomers and told them he was not connected with anything to do with fish – ‘No,  siree.’ Lesson number one. Any debutees in his following who took it for granted that their spiritual leader would bring forth fish for the hungry wherever fish could not be found, discovered pretty quickly that was simply dead wrong, and being wrong would not do at all in Big Mozzie’s eyes. A thing done wrong was the right key to wind up the boss. ‘ Biblical  stories  lived  in  somebody  else’s  desert,’  he  would start  up  and  talk  on  in  a  monologue  with  his  long  grey  beard bobbing  up  and  down,  mesmerising  every  one  in  sight,  as  he talked throughout the day, if the mood for talking up big took a hold of him. Big Mozzie was at pains to make it clear that eons of indoctrination heaped onto the hapless by bible-bashers were the scourge  of  the  blackfella’s  earth.  He  said  he  believed  Christian beliefs had indoctrinated Aboriginal communities like grog and it  was  true  to  say  it  was  even  the  cause  of  grog.  So,  grog  and other  people’s  religions  would  never  do,  never  on  the  big dreaming  track.  ‘Never,  never  will  do,’  he  explained.  ‘Biblical stories about baskets of fishes and loaves of bread belonged to the Jewish people or some other people,’ he said, with the often-seen pleased  look  on  his  face  of  hardly  believing  his  intuitiveness  for hunting  out  the  true  nature  of  things.  Time  and  again  things happened on the road, he explained, saying that debutees must make a clean slate in their mixed-up little minds, on their hands and knees and using their own face for a rag. Big Mozzie Fishman said  not  to  ask  him  about  fish  because  he  couldn’t  give  a  dead dog’s  eye  about  fishing,  in  fact,  he  hated  fish,  preferring  to  eat freshly hunted bush meat which the debutees had to produce for him on a daily basis, until it was proven beyond doubt that they had become true devotees. This morning, everyone was talking about going fishing. ‘Why do they do it?’  Fishman asked with loathing and muttered a string of undecipherables into his beard. By the time the glorious sunrise grew into a hot day, he was still pouring out a venomous lecture to the people travelling in the number one vehicle of how he hated people taking it for granted that he would catch fish for them. He spent  the  entire  day  conducting  a  monologue  of  his thoughts,  speaking  how  he  would  be  hard-pushed  to  remember the  last  time  he  had  ever  eaten  a  bit  of  turtle  meat.  ‘Stop  the bloody car,’ he ordered a dozen times at least throughout the day, bringing the entire convoy to a standstill again, so he could walk down  to  another  car  and  give  the  occupants  a  mouthful  of  his mind. ‘I  should kick the whole flaming lot of you out of the convoy and just go by myself in future.’ The day  was  a  heatwave,  and  the  zealots,  covered  in  sweaty dust from head to foot, were all jammed up against each other like tins  of  oily  sardines.  The  dust  flew  through  the  car  windows  and stayed trapped inside the vehicles, swirling around in little whirly winds of country dreams. Well! Breathing dust all day clogs up the lungs, and all the vehicles were full of men with heaving coughs, or sweating skins, shaken up and down from travelling every inch of corrugation of outback roads. each vehicle managed to motor on, while dirty oil spluttered over overheated engines, and exhaust pipes laid about in the dirt several  thousand  kilometres  behind.  The  motors  were  pieces  of modern  art  held  together  with  rusty  wire  and  leather  belts  or whatever  it  took  to  keep  the  cars  on  the  road.  The  drivers  were cherished  by  the  convoy  for  their  expert  motor  mechanic  skills learnt on the road. None had never shopped at the service station for  the  Hi  Tech  Carburettor,  or  the  Fast  and efficient  Brake Service,  or  spent  time  playing  around  with  the  state  of  the  art equipment at Correct It Clutch repairs. Nor had they ever seen the full range of spare parts and accessories for the cars they were driving, or knew what the Beaurepaires salesman sold for a living. But out on a lonely dusty road of the never never, Mozzie’s bush mechanics  would  have  picked  up  enough  man-made  rubbish  to fancy-dress  a  car,  or  do  a  complete  engine  rebuild,  gearbox overhaul, the upholstery and welding done to suit. In the middle of the day, the vehicles were travelling along a narrow, hilly road, twisting like a goat track out of Mozzie’s fishing nightmares. This stretch of road always caused Big Mozzie to break into  nervous  singing  with  a  great  deal  of  soul  to  the  spirits. ‘Goodbye  Joe,  me  got  to  go,  me  oh!  myo!  me  got  to  go  for  the codfish ladies down the Bayou.’ Seriously, he told Will Phantom, a young man in his mid-twenties, who was travelling in the same car right next to Big Mozzie as his driver, he was a living expert on every  Hank  Williams  song  known  to  mankind. older  convoy members  pretended  this  was  true.  It  saved  the  peace.  However, they knew, he knew, he never remembered the lyrics of any song, and simply invented new words to suit himself. But why not! ‘The son of a gun, hey, Will?’ And he broke into a jitterbug, singing on about some place as if he knew where it was: ‘A buzzin, having fun down the Bayou.’ Mozzie was so comfortable sitting there, wishing and shaking about  with  his roy orbison  glasses  on,  humming  on,  saying  his monosaccharose was playing up again, not acting his age, juggling his  extra  glass  eye  with  the  blue  iris.  The  only  blue  eye  in  the convoy.  Will  watched  the  glass  eye  rolling  through  the  air, landing from one hand into the other. It was a mesmerising act. The driver became so drawn into the eye, he could not keep his own eyes on the road. Mozzie usually kept the eye in the pocket of his trousers and liked to juggle with it on winding roads. It was for this reason nobody liked to drive for him and if they complained,  Mozzie had one response: ‘Get out, if you don’t like it, go on, get some other so-and-so up here. He can drive the bloody car from now  on.’  The  rolling  blue  eye  stared  into  the  back  seat  as  it bounced back and forth. Four pairs of frightened eyes in the back seat  moved  in  time,  going  left,  right,  staring  at  the  false  eye flipping to and fro, looking back at them, catching a glimpse of what they were thinking about: ready to jump out of that number one car, moving or not, with some so-and-so driving like he can’t wait to get to hell. unfortunately for them, there was one thing stopping anyone jumping from the reckless speeding convoy. It was the giddy sight down the gullies below the twisting road which had been formed and  re-formed  from  years  of  washaways,  and  now  hung  like  fish gills,  out  over  edges  of  the  limestone  substrata.  Who  wouldn’t become recomposed, after looking down to the graveyards full of rusting car bodies littered on the bottom in a hundred degrees of heat? Before they had commenced the climb, Mozzie stopped the convoy  like  he  had  done  on  previous  occasions  and  told  his  men assembled around him how to stay healthy by following a piece of his advice. ‘ If the spirit has its eye on someone’s car on this road, if your car starts rolling backwards down the road, and no matter what, this car of  yours  is  unable  to  make  it  up  the  hill,  then  there  is  only  one course of action. Let the ancestor have the car and be done with it. Let him drive it around if he likes, after all it’s his country. You don’t need the car. Be happy, because one day when you go to whatever heaven claims you, you will need a car to run about in, and your old car might be good enough to be waiting there for you. So don’t be a greedy person. Let it go. Always remember there isn’t going to be a guardian angel on this rubbish heap of a road to push your car up the winding hills. Instead of poisoning yourself and anyone else with your greed and selfishness, it is better for you to chuck the useless car and let it slide to the floor of the valley below.’ Feeling  satisfied,  Mozzie  finished  the  speech-making  taken from his epistle without end, sighed deeply, and jumped out of the heat back into his car, after ordering the convoy on its way again. ‘ one time, the spirit, he wasn’t so greedy. He only used to go for fancy wagons and animals,’ he told Will, who kept his eyes on the road. He had heard a million and one stories so far on this trip with the  Fishman.  Fishman  continued:  ‘Bones,  pure  white  of  dead horses, cattle and mules, plucked clean. You would see all of them down  there  being  consumed  by  the  spirit,  but  now  he  only  eats cars.’ The convoy finally reached the turn-off for the last night camp before home. This stop was always a lagoon at the end of a nondescript, rocky track into the thick undergrowth of spearwood trees and  turpentine  scrub.  Suddenly,  as  the  country  opened,  and  the cars  crawled  down  onto  flatter  ground  with  a  view  of  the  water, nobody  could  believe  their  eyes.  They  peered  through  the paperbark  foliage  at  the  water’s  edge  onto  the  mirror  image lagoon. Fishman put his eye back into his pocket. Those driving in the front cars wondered how could it be that someone else knew about their secret fishing hole. A s each car came over the rise and crawled down from the hill, and  their  occupants  peered  out  of  the  dust-caked  windscreens down into the lagoon, they all saw the fisherman. right down in the middle of the lagoon, a white man was sitting out there in his boat. He was sitting as casual as can be, just like he had paid good money for the place. ‘Now, what are we going to do?’ Shallow and brackish, they all realised the lagoon was drying up until the Wet arrived.  They  also  saw  the  significance  of  the  white  man  being there  first,  and  knew  they  would  soon  pull  out,  although  still exhausted, and tired from their long travel over the dry country to get to the water, hungry for fish. Will Phantom did not speak, but he thought they outnumbered the white man, one hundred to one.  Mozzie,  reading  his  thoughts,  quipped,  ‘You  know  Will,  it would  be  one  hell  of  a  world  where  the  truth  of  reality  weighed nothing.’ After a few minutes of quiet talk amongst themselves in the spearwood forest, someone who had taken a sidelong glance down through the paperbarks out over the lagoon’s edge, loudly whispered, ‘You know something? I think he’s dead.’ It was a pretty big thing to say about a complete stranger. A funny sort of joke to cause a commotion. The men jostled for a better view while their whispering grew to a crescendo, muttering to  each  other  and  trying  not  to  notice  the  fisherman,  while sneaking glances. ‘He’s not. He’s fishing.’ ‘No! Have a flippen better look.’ ‘He is dead.’ ‘ Told you…’ everyone started to have a good look, staring out there, waiting for movement from the fisherman, but he stayed stationary, like a painting of a still life. For a split second, nobody knew whether to laugh or cry, it was a relief, they were by themselves after all, and there was no white man, just a dead one. But, even if it was true, their  minds  snapped  to  another  truth:  the  convoy  would  have  to move on. Nobody would be hanging around for long, not if there was a  dead  white  man  sitting  out  there.  It  looked  bad.  It  would  be bad  for  them  if  someone  came  and  started  to  put  two  and  two together, making connections, constructing scenarios not worth thinking of; imagining the consequences. It looked as though his boat had become set in mud where it had moored itself, when the flood  waters had drained into the ocean, after the last wet. Now he  was  separated  from  the  sea  by  stretches  of  land  and  dry creeks.  A  halo  of  salt  lay  encrusted  in  white  crystalline  moulds around the sides of the boat. It was a freaky sight, the man just sitting  there,  tanned  skinned  clinging  to  a  skeleton.  It  was  the most terrible thing in the world in those moments of wondering what to do. Nobody thought it was a good idea to touch the body, or to be seen bringing it into town, so they said to Fishman, just leave him sitting there. ‘Someone else will find his body eventually.’ ‘He’s dead anyway.’ ‘Let the water take him out, poor thing anyhow.’ Fishman nodded briefly and said, ‘Alright then. Let’s go.’ ‘We are out of here.’ The word spread. Soon, perhaps that very night, with the smell of rain in the air, and the dark clouds in the north, it would start raining, and within hours the first flush of the rivers in flood would rush out to the sea. The  bush  echoed  with  the  movement  of  men  returning  to  their cars, and within fifteen minutes, when Will Phantom surveyed the area, he thought nobody would have ever known there had been over a dozen cars around him. on  the  road  again,  someone  said  he  thought  the  man  in  the boat looked a bit like old elias. He said he recognised the way he was just sitting there was how he remembered seeing elias out at sea  when  he  was  a  boy.  Fishman  said,  maybe  it  was,  how  would anyone know, they only got a distant view? It could have been. The idea that it was poor old elias travelled like some strange osmosis down the vehicles as though the convoy might have been an animal with  its  own  brain,  agreeing:  yeah! i   think  it  was  his  boat  too,  now i  think about it.  It was strange indeed, they were all talking about it being elias out there in the boat, all through the late afternoon and evening, until they crawled into the prickle bushes of desperance about midnight. ‘Yes, it was strange,’ Fishman yawned, reserving the last words he had to say for the day for himself. He was caving in to the deep tiredness  that  overcomes  a  person  returning  home  after  a  long absence. The sea air opened his dust-fevered nostrils to the fetor of rotting  fish  that  lived  permanently  in  the  air  of desperance.  It overpowered  the  sweet  smell  of  fish  being  cooked  in  dozens  of homes on a Friday night which too was still lingering in the air. Mozzie lay down to sleep beside the car on the blanket he had thrown on the ground. He heard the night owl somewhere in the trees  close  by,  and  in  the  distance,  the  guitars  strumming  in  the drinking camps over on Joseph Midnight’s eastside. The music of heartbeat why do you miss  on a car radio, voices and laughter.  oh! For sure,  some  people  have  a  whale  of  a  time  womanising,  drinking, having  mates.  Further  off  still,  he  heard  the  sea  woman  heaving her  breasts  onto  the  beach.  The  familiar  sounds  of  his  past  were falling from a magician’s wand, waving around specks of memory in  a  trail  of  glitter,  until  the  specks  became  millions  of  flooding, crashing  helter-skelter  visions  in  the  stars,  flooding  through  his mind.  All  those  deeply  buried  emotions  relating  to  home  had resurfaced, rising out of a cauldron in clouds of steam, to strain against  each  other.  For  a  long  time,  Mozzie  lay  on  the  ground waiting to drift away into sleep, thinking he would go mad if his mind  did  not  stop  running  until,  finally,  escape  came  when  he slipped into dreams that plucked their way through desperance and back to the events of the day. He knew now, recapturing the sight of elias sedately sitting in the boat as a dead man would, that this was a message given to him from the spirit world. While he stood on the brink of his dream, watching elias in the lagoon, Mozzie felt the spirits saying that he was alright. Nobody ever knew for sure what had become of elias after that fateful morning, when he turned his back on desperance, and was last seen dragging his boat back to sea. Now, they knew, Mozzie thought – Elias was fine, he had gone to the spirit world in the sky  across  the  sea,  safe  from  the  wickedness  given  unfairly  to  him  at Desperance. In his  sleep,  Mozzie  dreamt  of  the  moments  after  the  convoy headed back on the gravelly road, he was sitting in the passenger seat, just staring at the empty road ahead, and thinking about elias, and checking in his mind, taking a mental tally, walking through the  rows  of  groaning  cars,  and  realising  what  he  had  originally thought, that Will Phantom had left them at the lagoon and was no longer travelling in any of the other cars. His mind slipped quietly back  down  the  spearwood-lined  track,  and  he  stood  behind  a cluster of trees, surveying the landscape, until he found Will sitting alone by the lagoon looking at elias. Mozzie crept over, his feet on padded leaves, until at last, he was able to look so closely into Will’s undetecting  face,  it  was  a  wonder  that  Will  could  not  feel  the intrusion of someone searching into his eyes, trying to dig out his soul. Mozzie, withdrew, just be satisfied , he told himself. A deal was a deal, Mozzie Fishman – you had delivered Will, as you promised, safe and  sound  back  inside  of  his  country .  The  sound  of  the  owl  brought Mozzie back to the night, and he lay half awake, thinking of Will Phantom, who had many responsibilities for one so young. Hours  of  fitful  sleep  passed  by  as  Mozzie  Fishman  retraced the  journey  to  and  fro  from  the  lagoon,  where  he  again  hid behind  the  spearwood  trees  with  the  spirits  of  Will’s  ancestors, watching over the corpse of elias. It occurred to Mozzie that the silent  spirit  men  were  listening  to  the  sound  of  Will  Phantom’s country,  to  the  dull,  monotonous  clanging  made  by  heavy machinery churning and gouging into the land. These thoughts annoyed Mozzie into wakefulness, to sigh resignedly, and again, to  roll  over  on  his  other  side,  muttering  in  his  half-sleep  to question the night: Was there any good carting around your malaise? Spreading  it  around  the  camp? inflicting  others?  Where  had  it  led  to?  Mozzie  knew  he  had  tried,  more  than  some  people,  more  than Will Phantom’s own father whom he had told two years ago: ‘I am taking  Will  on  the  pilgrimage  –  convince  him  of  our  ways  of renewing  the  strength  of  the  country.’  Norm  had  not  batted  an eyelid  and  continued  gutting  fish.  ‘Nothing’s  changed,  Norm, you win,’ Mozzie acquiesced, seeing Norm Phantom in the dead of  night,  gutting  a  wriggling  fish.  Will  had  carried  a  mountain with him across the desert and in the end, everyone in the convoy carried a replica of Will Phantom’s mountain. In some  ways,  Mozzie  recalled  feeling  lighter  when  they  left Will  at  the  lagoon,  and  the  convoy,  even  though  it  must  have motored  up  the  steep  gravelly  road  again  like  a  clumsy,  panting animal, had at the time felt like a breeze, floating with the dust and untangling  itself  from  depression.  How  surprising  had  been  the feeling of relief of not having Will for company anymore, although he had cherished the young man like his own son. ‘ Ah!  a  man  does  not  need  to  sleep,  ain’t  worth  the  trouble,’ Mozzie  said  to  himself,  sick  of  his  troubled  night.  He  sat  on  his bedding and dragged dead grass and sticks into the fire with the cherished long stick he used for bashing snakes over the head. He set the billy to boil. In a few hours time it would be sunrise at home for his men. He gazed  casually  through  the  darkness,  scrutinising  Norm Phantom’s  place,  contemplating  the  stubborn  old  coot.  When  he saw  a  light  on,  flickering  dimly  through  the  Pricklebush,  Mozzie Fishman  flashed  the  Clint eastwood  smile . you stupid  old  coot,  call yourself  tough,  couldn’t  help  yourself,  could  you? The  light  intrigued Mozzie because he realised Norm had stayed up all night too, in spite  of  himself.  Mozzie  twisted  his  grey  beard,  elated  about catching  someone  out,  even  in  the  utmost  privacy  of  their innermost emotions. He knew Norm would not acknowledge that he was waiting for Will. Will was never expecting any big homecoming from his father. No one imagined Norm Phantom rushing out, carrying the fatted calf on his shoulders as soon as he got the news that his son was coming home. There was no use for some angelic child rushing to tell  the  patriarch, See  the  prodigal  son  was  coming,  walking  if  you please,  through  the  spinifex,  over  the  rise.   ‘Yep!  Time  will  tell,’ Mozzie sarcastically quipped. ‘And pigs have wings.’ Will would reach desperance in his own good time ,  so let the light burn in a house where a fully-grown man only had time to recognise six of his seven children. The house with a slogan: A man gets sick of running for his kids – i  run for none of the buggers now . ‘It’s like that is  it?’  Mozzie  mouthed  the  words,  remembering  asking  Norm when  he  had  heard  news  of  the  rift  between  father  and  son. What did he say back? He just glared for a moment, then he kept on scaling the big fish he had in his hand. Was he mad? He was mad alright. Scales were  flying  everywhere.  What  did  you  say  then? you were  a  stupid man  when  you  were  young,  and  now,  you  have  turned  into  a  stupid  old man , Big Mozzie remembered cursing Norm Phantom. Cursed him easily for rejecting a son like Will. Was he not made with the same blood and bone that made a good man? Indifferent, Norm spat in exactly the same way he would at a less than perfect fish on the end of a line, a puffer fish: Chuck it to the dogs. What was the difference between  the  patriarch  and  the  zealot  who  grew  out  of  the  same Pricklebush thicket? Time would tell. Listen to this. The talk was all over town. He did not? He did. Will  Phantom  of  all  persons  mind  you  had  absconded,  flown  the coup, walked. Walked where? Walked to eastside. What did Norm say, his son and all ? He swung the axe. He was hot with fever for a week. He kept swinging the axe around. All doors were slammed shut  over  on e astside.  A  thousand  nails  bashed  into  the  coffin which parents make for themselves when they throw their children away. This incident between Norm Phantom and his son gave birth to intractability on a grand scale. oh! Well! War was war. When you have  been  at  war  for  four  centuries  a  son  cannot  overrule  the father even in modern times. old Cyclone, the mastermind of the old war in present east and west hostilities, long dead as a doornail, did not change matters. ‘ enemy never die,’ Norm quipped in his first  and  final  words  on  the  matter  when  he  watched  Joseph Midnight’s relatives carrying Cyclone’s coffin to the cemetery. dead and good riddance, the mob on Westside remembering the good times  and  the  bad  went hip! hip! hooray!  Kudala!   when  Cyclone died, but what a man! Memory,  honoured  in  death,  incorporated  blood  ties.  This was what Norm meant when he referred to the enemy amongst them.  Then,  downcast  whispers  spread,  unbelievable  whispers full of truth and what have you, stultified the air in the Pricklebush over on Westside: Will! Oh! Dear Lord, not Will,  his father’s image in every way, walking off with his own mind, apparently gone to live even, in old Cyclone’s house . The lad was stolen to the other side of town from  under  the  father’s  nose  by  the  grand-daughter  of  a  bad man: One for you and one for me. The nuisance haunted the living from the grave. Cyclone was  old  and  clever, binjuna  Malbu  kuluwulugu .  He believed  in  magic  and  became  the  first  person  in  contemporary times to turn imagination into reality. Instead of being a rain man, or weather man, like he ought to have been, he brought lies to life. one of his extraordinary stories about the ‘once upon a time’ was a fictional pig story that became a real life nightmare. In  one  of  his  elaborate  once-upon-a-time  inventions  there lived an illusory porker of exceptional longevity with unwholesome attitudes  to  Pricklebush  people  roaming  the  riverbanks.  Cyclone, messing  with  magic  in  his  fingers,  crawled  into  the  guts  of  his twentieth-century  story  and  brought  it  to  life.  He  called  his creation  Abilene  but  she  came  to  life  and  left  mess  after  mess  in real  nightmares.  This  was  what  happened  to  the uncle  from eastside who was the original owner of the blue Toyota. Westside pricklebush people said it was a fluke of nature that Abilene only attacked  members  of  Cyclone’s  family.  Cyclone  had  run  to  the police, the law, the white people when uncle was killed. He stood around  the  police  station  in  his  old  baggy  pyjamas  complaining, ‘What  about  all  the  deaths  relating  to  only  our  kin?’  The  new policeman pondered what he heard. ‘How come only our family is coming to this grief?’ he asked. The policeman became impatient and jumpy to use his gun. He made inquiries, made it quick smart. He called homicide up and they came up to desperance and said: ‘It  was  time  for  some  action,  man!’  This  was  what  happened when  the  favourite uncle  over eastside  was  killed  and  Cyclone was running down to the police station every five minutes, and his family joined in the running after the police, until they were there  all  the  time,  jumping  up  and  down,  slapping  the  walls, complaining louder and louder, making threats, throwing their fish guts around and pointing their finger down Westside, over to Norm Phantom’s place. When Norm Phantom was arrested as a murder suspect he said he had nothing to say. Proudly he walked off with the police. It would have been good if the whole world could have seen the way he just walked as though he never had any fear inside of his body. The old people reminded everyone on Westside for months afterwards what a good day it was to see someone walk like that. When the day came for  him  to  sit  in  court  he  sat  there  like  a  rock.  He  said  nothing  to anybody. Westside folk swelled with admiration. The rallying families of the two Pricklebush factions sat on either side of the temporary courtroom set up in the lime-green Council building meeting room. Both sides were eyeballing each other. Then the whispering started. Then  the  all-out  abuse  could  be  heard  up  the  street.  ‘Good  Lord! Thank you it wasn’t the Sabbath, because the good Lord needn’t have been in town,’ the district judge roared for silence when he made his appearance after nobody had noticed the usher had announced his entrance.  He  found  out  very  fast  how  your  ears  could  turn  red after hearing what one of those families could say about you. The witnesses on Norm Phantom’s side of the family said they saw no fluke there, no coincidence that the other side got the chop all  of  the  time  whilst  their  side  didn’t.  The  oldest  witness  from Westside got up and explained that the pig was territorial and, ‘It was just going about its natural self, like Adam and eve, pardon for using white man diction, that was why it got to hunt everything it believed belonged to itself within the precinct of its boundaries.’ The judge told the old man his story was plausible and he would consider it. The other  oldest  man  on eastside,  Joseph  Midnight,  in  fact, Cyclone’s son said: ‘It was understandable why Norm Phantom was the  prime  suspect  in  matters  of  crime  relating  to  Abilene.’  The judge  asked  him  to  continue  his  evidence  even  though  everyone knew it was only grog talking. ‘Who knows even how close he was to the big set of gristly trotters, since, wasn’t it known how Norm Phantom  could  talk  just  plain  too  nicely  about  all  matters  fauna and  flora  in  these  parts?’  But  the  judge  explained  something important to old Midnight: ‘You cannot rightly accuse a man for all of them deaths just on hearsay, without hard evidence, just because he talks to the trees.’ Norm’s blood  relatives  testified  as  sober  people  with  bent heads.  They  never  frightened  the  judge  or  any  of  the  Australian law  because  they  spoke  their english  calmly,  which  they  knew would  not  frighten  white  folk,  who  never  liked  black  aggressors. They turned out to be reliable witnesses. drunken people did not make  good  witnesses  slipping  around  across  the  nice  shiny, linoleum  floor,  running  around  in  court  with  delirium  tremens, not remembering who was dead or alive, disappearing for hours at a time down the pub for more heart-starter when they should have been sitting like solid citizens in the court room. The atmosphere of the courthouse changed dramatically with a shift in emphasis on the case when Cyclone’s kinsmen came to the court full drunk, and engaged in slinging accusations at each other. The eastside witnesses claimed Norm Phantom drove them out of their  homes  to  live  on  the  east  side  of  town.  They  should  have blamed Angel day for that. She split the families. Then, something totally unexpected happened to the case. The judge became impatient and sick and tired of tapping his fingers up and down on the judge’s bench as he studied it for days, figuring out the age of the pine knots and circles, in order to avoid looking  at  the  motionless  mudflats  through  the  window,  or  the hawks  and  crows  soaring  in  the  hot  thermals  over  towards  the rubbish  dump  and  wondering  why  he  had  not  become  an ornithologist  instead  of  a  judge  presiding  over  a  murder  trial, while  waiting  for  the  prosecution  witnesses  to  arrive.  Suddenly, out  of  the  blue,  he  snapped  to  the  assembled  law  men,  ‘Case dismissed.’ Too good , cheered the Westside gallery, as the judge jumped up from his swivelling chair like he had ants in his pants, slammed his papers and judgely possessions in his Queensland port and walked out of the courtroom. outside, the judge demanded the car keys for the Paddy Van waiting outside to pick up the drunks loitering the footpath from the court to the snake pit. The vehicle headed out of town via the footpath. Neither the judge nor the Paddy Van were ever seen again. The old people sitting in the grass with the binoculars knew what the crazy old white man went through. No secret could be kept from their prying eyes. Oh! yeah, we know where the warri, warri ngabaya went to , they claimed. In very serious tones, reserved  for  a  senior  Law  person,  they  explained  how  he  had gone  off  to  Surfers  Paradise. oh !  poor, damu  ngabaya .  He  had reinvented himself down there amongst the surfers, going around incognito  in  a  refurbished  surfie  van,  like  a  vagabond.  They  say you would not recognise him now, living in abandoned warehouses with  the  city  pigeons  crapping  in  his  hair.  Nobody  from  the Pricklebush  ever  told  the  policeman  the  story,  otherwise, damu , damu  ngabaya   would  be  facing  pretty  serious  charges  back  in desperance. Sweet reminiscences. dawn crawled over the eastern horizon and Big  Mozzie  reckoned  to  himself,  that  his  second  name  should have been reminisce. It felt grand to be back with the memories of the ludicrous trial, junk foods, unhealthy intrigues and other musings about what souls do in their search for truth. The truth about the pig story. What truth could be found in watching a man concentrating on scraping fish skin with his skinning knife? What price silence? ‘ They got their just deserts the pack of mongrels,’ Norm told Mozzie  on  the  day  before  Mozzie  took  the  convoy  on  the  road again. Norm had whistled, skinning another fish, and with a twist in  his  face  as  he  concentrated  on  the  job,  said,  ‘Couldn’t  wait  for more of the bastards to go down either.’ As he listened to the dull sound of the knife scraping, Big Mozzie could not help noticing the blue  guts  and  fish  flesh  spilt  all  over  a  newspaper  article  about killer bush pigs. Mozzie caught Norm looking at him reading the soiled newspaper. Pulling and tugging at the fish, Norm broke the silence.  ‘Walking  about  in  country,  country  that  don’t  belong  to them anyway, they should be in the Territory somewhere else, am I speaking a true word or not, and that’s what happens when you do the wrong thing.’ Mozzie, not wanting to buy into the old arguments about who belongs  where,  said  he  would  not  know  where  those  people should be or if there was any killing pig. Norm dropped his fish, and  it  went  bang  as  it  fell  into  a  green  bucket,  and  wiping  his hands with a dirty towel, said he had more fish to catch. As he was preparing  to  leave,  he  told  Mozzie  he  only  believed  what  other ordinary people believed: ‘If they say there is a pig, I say the same thing. If they say he was a killer and he would kill again, I say the same  thing.  I  am  no  better  man  than  other  people.’  It  was  no wonder  you  created  suspicion,  Mozzie  thought,  watching  Norm Phantom  walking  off  down  the  track  in  the  tussock  grasses towards his boat, ‘You bring on trouble.’ 
Will Phantom thought about many things while sitting  on  the  side  of  the  lagoon.  It  was  a moment of regaining his own sense of self after living for so long in Mozzie’s shadow. The sound of the groaning mine reminded him there would be a lot of things to be done now he was back home. The dark shadows surrounding his father sung into his  mind.  He  hoped  things  might  be  better  between  them,  but  if not – who cared? Business first, he thought, looking over at poor old elias. A deep furrow formed between his eyebrows, just like the father’s, as he frowned at the little boat sitting in the middle of the lagoon. There was no telling where you will find fish… This story, Joseph Midnight said, must be told, because there were  all  kinds  of  particular  people  –  government  people, important people, money people, nuisance bugger people, anyone who can take your thoughts away on pieces of paper, just like that, and  put  it,  wherever  they  like,  inside  white  man’s  technology  in whatchayougoinama call  it?  Computers.  Yes,  that’s  the  one  the  old blackfella man had been tinking  about, racking his brains for it: ‘It come to my head for a look around.’  Yeah! Alright. ‘They lock em up all the information inside for them own eyes only.’ That’s how he was talking now because he loved the young rebel Will Phantom who  had  disappeared  from  the  Gulf  after  being  accused  by  the State government, and the Federal government too, of sabotaging the development of the mining industry. A media frenzy generated by  city  based  government,  searched  high  and  low  for  Will  in  the Gulf of Carpentaria. Well! Sweet sugary governments in the cities were  not  going  to  spend  vast  sums  of  money  in  a  place  like desperance to find an Aboriginal. You listen to an old man’s story if you want to know how. every  day,  never  miss,  the  white  city  people  started  to metamorphose themselves up there in desperance, and they were asking too many questions, millions maybe, of the white neighbours. Will  Phantom  was  that  popular.  A  big  troublemaker  but  nobody had a photo of him . Got nothing to give , for the white people – too insular. What they got to know? Got nothing. You could see they were city people who were too plain scared to go about, and come down there in the Pricklebush and ask the Aborigine  people sitting at home in their rightful place. They looked, oh! this side, or that side  of  town. No,  not  going, they  must  have  said  about  the Pricklebush.  Waiting  and  waiting  instead.  Those  reporter  types hung around town not knowing what to do, then they all looked outside of the fish and chip shop, and guess who? one old blackfella man,  Joseph  Midnight  now,  white  hair  jumping  out  everywhere from he  head, he was sitting there. Him by himself: uptown. He looked  over  his  shoulder  at  those  city  newspaper  people and  saw  they’d  even  got  a  Southern  blackfella  with  them.  A  real smart one, educated, acting as a guide. He got on a tie, clean white shirt  and  a  nice  suit.  He  goes  up  to  old  man  and  called  him, ‘ uncle,’ and he says: ‘What kind of person you reckon, older man, you say Will Phantom?’ old Midnight he looked back for awhile, and  he  says:  ‘Who’s  this?’  He  was  thinking  now  for  must  be  two minutes before he was squinty eyes, still saying nothing, and then he speaks back, ‘Well! You, you, say, I never, and I never believe it. You say I am your uncle, then listen to this one, boy. ‘No, this or that is ever going to happen when Will Phantom was around. No way! ever seen a brolga dancing in a mirage? our Will, he moves lightly through the bush to the beat of the muddied and cracked dancing feet of a million ancestors. ‘Will Phantom was not full of bad luck, always whingeing and saying, Expect  the  worst ,  like  other  sort  of  people.  Nump!  Hmm! Like the ones who in ignorance can retrospectively call up the evil spirits, turn on the switch for melodramatics, make tranquillity run amok, then cut loose all those motley-skinned bush pigs with the spiky  hair  –  to  come  out  to  play.  You  hear  them  tearing  at  your brains to get through to your nightmares – you hear them saying, Give me a three. Click, slow click, quick click, with their little trotters – up high,  down  low,  too  slow .  Then  woof! o ut  of  the  night  dust,  they manifest  themselves  into  wild  killer  boars  you  never  believe  who come  out  of  your  head  in  their  one,  two,  threes,  and  more  than likely  counting  non-malevolent  sheep  to  sleep,  crazed,  on  their little black piggy-wiggly tracks for miles around, to make your hair stand on end when you walk around in the bush here with those kind of people who bring you bad luck. Those kind of people never made you feel safe at all. Never. ‘ or,  just  say  what  could  happen  in  the  broad  daylight,  worse than a circus, if you were walking down the street of a loony town –  Soosh!  Here,  but  don’t  tell  anybody  I  said  that  –  walking  with someone like that. If you were just plain dumb to go walking with those kind of people, you even minding your own black person’s business – Well! Can’t be done! You still had to keep a good eye out for the nearest tree or maybe, even a jolly fence to run to and then, you got to fly up the top. ‘ There are some people in existence, just one or two, who make dogs want to froth at the mouth. Then what happens to poor old you, who just happens to be out walking with them sort of people and you didn’t know? ‘Well!  You  gotta  know  all  the  time,  just  in  case  those  pack  of another people’s biting dogs – real bad buggers, are going to jump out  of  nowhere  and  ambush  you.  And  some  diseased  dog  isn’t going to waste his limited time on earth being discriminate about you because you come from the city, because it’s going to bite you good and proper anyhow. ‘ Then,  what  say?  You  could  even  be  out  fishing,  sitting  with your lonesome, singing a lonely song, except that nuisance flotilla of  man  of  wars  as  far  as  the  eye  could  see,  kept  following  you around all day waiting for you to make one slip so they can leave your carcass floating and bloating in the sea. But Will Phantom was a different kettle of fish. oh! Yes! He would come along whistling some happy old song he composed about the sea, and those jellywelly  creatures  just  turned  around  and  happily  be  on  their  way. Not interested in making trouble. They left his fishing waters for good. And then, what happens next? Will Phantom left you, gone, shot through, never stick around one minute. Left you sitting out there in the middle of the ocean. Must be all your bad luck come running back just like clicking your fingers, just to show you, you got no luck at all and it would be – what next? Woom! Boom! You never heard so much noise. ‘You  know  what?  More  bad  luck.  Your  boat’s catched   on  fire. There is probably going to be an explosion. And you are that jolly well scared you are going to die in the ocean, you just about run across water to get home. ‘See! Well  none  of  that.  That  never  happened  to  Norm Phantom and he passed all of that on to Will. So! Will has a good way with nature, all of the natural things, except he is not too good with human nature. That boy was in one hell of rush to throw fuel on man-made adversaries. If it had anything to do with mankind, he had the knack to rub it hard, right up the wrong way. His father was like that too. And if you thought the falling out with his father was not a good thing – you are wrong about that. It was a blessing compared to what he had gone around accomplishing in his life to date. oh! Poor me – What a history. This lad was writing memory with a firestick that made lightning look dull. ‘So, if you want to know what Will Phantom looked like – He looked like that.’ When Will Phantom had caught his first glimpse of the fisher  man on the lagoon from Mozzie’s vehicle sliding down the gravel track through the spearwood trees, he knew it was elias even though the emaciated shell barely resembled the man he once knew who had helped tame his childhood spirit. He knew it, as true as only water people  with  a  natural  cunning  have  of  recognising  another fisherman by sight, from a huge distance away, even across heavy seas, from the particular way he sat, stooped over a line. He felt a tinge of guilt about not telling Mozzie at the time, but for some strange reason he knew he had to stay quiet about poor old elias  while  the  convoy  was  at  the  lagoon.  He  felt  he  had  to respect elias’s  death  and  privacy.  It  would  have  been  how elias would have wanted it. He remembered a private man who shunned opportunities for the company of other people. He saw elias, a tall, shaggy  white-haired  man  in  his  fish-smelling  hut  stacked  inside and out with fishing gear, and watched his hard-skinned fingers longing  for  salt  water,  skilfully  fixing  lines,  fashioning  a spearwood  rod,  mending  nets,  his  whole  existence  one  of  a fishingman’s life. elias, with shy downcast eyes away from the sea, said he never had time for socialising and mixing with strangers. A ll  of  these  childhood  memories  flooded  through  Will Phantom’s mind, and he accepted the gift of elias’s spirit, who had been  waiting  to  pass  these  memories  of  his  life  onto  him.  The stranger to others, who had taken him fishing, growing him up in the sea. The last thing elias would have wanted would be to have strangers pawing over his remains, staring at him close up, trying to read his soul with who knows what kind of thoughts they were likely to be carrying around in their heads. But as it turned out he realised  he  need  not  have  worried  himself  about elias’s  wish  for privacy in death. Although elias might have been a dead man for weeks  or  months,  he  still  had  enough  life  in  him  to  protect  his personal privacy. The discovery of a body had set off pandemonium amongst  the  convoy,  and  within  minutes,  everyone  had  bundled themselves  back  into  their  jalopies,  and  were  rip-roaring  up  the track in a stampede to get back on the main road. A   gentle  northerly  breeze  had  started  to  blow  through  the spearwood  after  the  last  of  the  convoy  was  heard  –  zem,  zem, crackling up the track. The breeze had come down from the sea, passing  inconspicuously  over  the  noisy  motor  cars  on  the  Gulf road, touching Will in a gentle caress, as though the ocean seemed pleased to know its son had returned. Time was a fleeting whisper for Will sitting on the edge of the lagoon that had been carved by an eternity of rushing floodwaters inside  the  remains  of  a  forest  that  lived  a  million  years  ago,  and had, after a moment of shock when drowned by high seas, petrified into  rock.  Time  accumulates  thought  or  vice  versa  and  Will Phantom,  in  no  hurry  to  return  home  after  years,  since  he  had been travelling on sacred journeys, took his time deciding what he ought to do about pulling the boat in, until he felt a cold shiver of fear running down his back. Swiftly he glanced around, and in the silence  nothing  moved,  except  where  a  thudding  of  ancestral footsteps  was  pounding  loudly  in  his  head,  and  his  fear  shifted, across to elias in the lagoon. He began to think how strange it was for elias to be sitting out there,  peculiar  how  someone  who  had  never  left  the  sea’s  edge could be so far inland from the coast. His best memory of elias was the  coastal  man  forever  staring  at  the  seas  lost  from  his  memory. Now  Will,  who  had  spent  too  long  following  the  illusions  of  the dreamtime,  was  thrown  back  into  the  real  world,  where  men became  clowns  and  clowns  men,  which  was  another  string  of illusions altogether. How could he have come so far, particularly if he had to carry his boat over long stretches of dry land? How far would he have reached before the sheer exhaustion of the effort of carrying  the  boat  overland  had  overtaken  him?  Surely,  he  would have needed at least one or two other men to help him upriver? Will began  to  chart  the  river  course  from  the  sea  that  might have  been  how e lias  had  brought  his  boat  inland.  Will  knew  this river  backward,  like  the  palm  of  his  hand.  The  river  and  Will Phantom had many secrets to share. So, Will mapped the journey and stalled at the many gaps in the river where elias would have stalled too, to catch his breath and to contemplate the boat which would not have made it through the narrow causeways, prevented by the jagged, petrified remains of the ancient trees, perhaps once fig trees, that had become rock. There were places where the water was  just  a  trickle,  where  only  a  green  ant,  on  a  floating  piece  of weed,  would  have  been  able  to  forge  its  way  ahead. elias  would have been forced to carry the boat, not heavy, but a real burden over a long distance as he negotiated each step with the riverbank, climbing up on the side of the creeks, up along the wallaby tracks. Frequently,  he  would  have  been  forced  to  stop,  where  he  would have  hesitated,  and  hoped  he  had  taken  the  best  of  the  long, slender tracks running beside the creeks. elias,  manoeuvring  the  boat  barefoot,  would  have  wound  his way  through  an  obstacle  course  of  dense  prickle  scrub,  burrs, spinifex  spikes,  stomping  bloodied  feet  through  the  long  spear grass  as  he  felt  for  the  potholes,  and  twisting  over  and  under  a devil’s  playground  of  hanging  branches.  It  would  be  no  good thinking  about  being  somewhere  else.  Think  if  in  one  loose moment,  and  Will  Phantom’s  own  heart  slipped  a  beat  for elias, following  the  unknown  river  course,  slipping  down  steep  banks, where strangers could break their neck. In the minds of local people there had always been an infallible certainty  without  evidence  or  proof  of elias’s  knowledge  which was said to have come from travelling the many seas of the world. It was just so, for the spirits who had stolen his memory had left him the sea. This was what happens with the magic moments – a skilful coil of a rope, a special knotted hook on the fishing line, slyly  observed  shrouded  mysteries  given  a  story  by  people  who had  yet  to  reap  bounties  from  travelling  distant  seas.  Yet, instinctively Will knew elias was no river man, and in fact, could not remember one occasion of elias ever going to the fresh waters to fish. on  the other hand, Will knew this area well. He, having grown from a child with yellow spinifex hair, had walked through all  these  tracks, a  billygoat’s  kid ,  the uncles  proclaimed,  and  his father,  the  big  man  Norm  Phantom,  had  joined  in  with  the laughter,  complaining  with  pride  in  his  voice, the  goat’s  got  no schoolwork  on  his  mind  –  ever .  In  the  happy  days,  following  his father’s shadow all around this country, he already knew a little tin boat  could  not  go  through  the  steep-sided  gorges  on  a  wallaby track. If anyone  had  the  mind  to  be  taking  time  thinking  about somebody else’s life until his heart was content, or cannot leave a thing alone, someone like Will Phantom, then they would have to think what else elias would have had to do to be sitting dead for a very long time, waiting for fish, with his line out in a stagnant pond laced with salt? The only straightforward answer to Will Phantom’s mind, was that after having been forced by the path of the creek to lug the boat up ridges of stone and petrified forests, on banks of flaking  earth, elias  travelled  across  the  high  plains. elias,  singlehandedly, would have carried the boat cross-country through the spinifex  until  the  watercourse  had  widened  and  he  would  have taken the boat back down to the creek again. He would have had to repeat the exercise at least a dozen times in following the river from its mangrove-lined mouth to where he had ended his journey in the lagoon. And who was there to help e lias to go fishing miles inland, when everyone for miles around knew all the fish had gone to the sea? Will  considered  the  circumstances  of  the  day elias  left desperance  forever.  He  remembered  what  the  old  people  said about the terrible night of uptown: accusing Elias of burning up the Queen’s picture.  They often told the story of how offended uptown had  been  about  the  Queen’s  picture  burning,  and  coming  down quick  smart  asking  the  Pricklebush  people, What  kind  of  low-down dog,  a  complete  useless  loafer,  would  burn  the  Queen’s  picture?   The  old people thought they were expected to say they done it, own up to it,  but  instead  they  responded  to uptown: Unfortunately,  you  can’t exterminate  a  Queen  by  burning  her  picture .  That  was  the  kind  of treachery elias was accused of when they said he had chucked fourgallon tins of kerosene all over the brand-new Shire Council offices and  burnt  them  flat  to  the  ground.  Nobody  touched  the  Queen. uptown found elias guilty of sedition and treachery to the throne because he was a new Australian whom the whole town had seen walking out of the sea, and when he went home to the sea again, no one had even bothered to go out to say goodbye. Nobody would have helped elias to go inland. They had screamed like a landlord at him to leave their continent forever and never come back. Will stood  up.  If  anyone  had  seen  him  standing  there,  they would have believed it was Norm, fishing this lagoon years ago, at the onset of the Wet season as a million fish teemed up the river, when he was twenty-four. Will with bare chest, no shirt to his name, covered  with  weeks  of  accumulated  desert  dust,  his  jeans,  no longer  blue,  were  ingrained  with  dirt  from  months  of  travelling through the dry country. one muddy lagoon was not going to do a  hell  of  a  lot  more  damage,  so  Will  Phantom  walked  knee-deep through the mud, breaking the crust of salt crystals which sparkled where hit by sunlight, as enchanting as snow. Will knew that elias could not have undertaken such a trip to the  lagoon  by  himself.  He  listened  to  thunder  in  the  storms brewing in the North, but the skies were clear, and the afternoon sun  shone  like  silver  on  the  mud,  glittering  salt  and  water.  As  he walked  out,  Will  was  disturbed  by  juxtaposing  images,  flashing across his mind. In one image, he saw white men, perhaps from the town,  he  did  not  know,  making  a  mockery  of elias’s  death.  But there  were  only  a  handful  of  people  outside  of  Mozzie’s  convoy who  knew  about  the  existence  of  this  sacred  lagoon. Uncles!   He needed  to  think  of  the uncles  but  they  failed  to  appear  through uptown! The suffocating net! He put the thought aside, knowing he would have to think about who knew how to find the lagoon – titles,  names,  faceless  people  jumped  momentarily,  a  split  second only to show themselves, to announce they existed. He saw the occasional strike of lightning from the storms in the North,  the  day  would  soon  become  darker,  everything  would  be covered in darkness, within thirty minutes, when the storm had set in. He moved through the muddy water which at its deepest level came up to his waist, and did not take long to reach the boat. He said  a  quiet  hello  to elias, What  are  you  doing  here? He  began  to investigate the human remains smelling of the ocean’s salty brine. Interference,  the  slightest  touch  can  open  a  Pandora’s  box,  and Will leaning on the side of the boat, found the aroma of the sea was as  distant  as  the  sea,  compared  to  the  overpowering  stench  of decomposing  fish  which  emanated  in  a  heat  of  steam  from  two sugar bags, lying on the floor of the boat. Will  recognised  the  bags  the  instant  he  saw  them.  He remembered how he had often stood back as a child, out of the way, wishing to become elias, cramming things into any old sugar or  flour  bag  –  tackle,  food,  his  belongings,  rowing  away  to  sea whenever he chose, coming back, jiggling a bag of fish in front of his  nose.  Will  expected  maybe elias  had  bagged  one  or  two  old barramundi.  The  ancient  ones  that  lurked  in  hidden  places  of diminished  lagoons  waiting  for  the  Wet  to  arrive. elias,  a  skilful fisherman, would have pried them out of their underwater cocoons. He believed only the old hunter uncles could achieve such a haul. Any  other  hunter  of  the  barramundi  fish  would  need  to  be  some champion fisherman to have found a fish left in this mud, let alone catch it. The other fish Will expected could be hooked, perhaps, a few reasonable-sized freshwater sooty grunter, rifle fish or bream, if the boat was in the main water arteries coming up to the coast from the spring-fed river systems. Not the useless little tributary jutting off into a mud hole at the end of the dry. He got rid of the flies that had picked up the whiff of rotting fish  in  the  air.  They  were  swarming  in  from  every  corner  of  the bush it appeared, for miles around. Hundreds of flies covered his body.  The  larger  march  flies,  which  also  flew  around  the  boat drunk  with  the  stench,  began  to  attack  every  part  of  his  body exposed above the water. It was then, in those fleeting moments, as he caught sight of the rotting slime-covered remains of fish spilling out  of  the  putrid  bags,  a  cold  shiver  ran  down  his  back,  and  he spun  around,  his  brown  eyes  surveying  the  banks  and  into  the bush, right around the lagoon. He looked at what was coming out of the bags. one fish fell after the other, still with their flesh intact, and  it  was  easy  to  discern  that  they  could  not  have  been  caught more than ten days ago. Sea fish! These were fish no man had ever seen  this  far  inland.  Will  turned  to  the  spearwood  as  though expecting the spirits to answer, tell him what surely they knew. Sea water was lapping its last little flip! slip! for sea creatures living where Will Phantom now stood 500 million years ago, when the sea levels had been as high as the surrounding hills, when time and  life  on  the  deep-sea  plain  of  the  Pacific ocean  was  not  even advanced  enough  to  beget  a  fish.  Yet  now,  on  this  uncelebrated occasion, elias had apparently fished saltwater fish from the mud hole. elias’s  beautiful  coral  trout,  pink  ten  days  before,  its  putrid remains clearly recognisable falling from the bag. Will could remember the deep trench in the ocean where elias fished,  with  a  line  baited  and  dropped  200  metres  deep.  In  the other bag, emptied perfunctorily, its contents a revelation of other sea fish, strangers to these parts of the country, were hardly given a second glance. Queenfish, snapper, red emperor, mangrove jack, bream, all reef fish, and one giant trevally, a tidal fish – so what? Will  retrieved  the  line  and  pulled  it  in,  discovering  what  he  had expected, elias rigged up for deep-sea trolling. The white-breasted sea eagle’s flight was almost noiseless as it dropped out of the sky, falling down, descending down, so quick, until it flew, whistling in behind Will to scoop the stinking trevally up from the mud. Watching it perch on a dead log on the north side  of  the  lagoon,  it  surprised  Will  that  while  he  had  noticed  it hovering in the sky, he had not taken any interest in it. The large bird was yet another unfamiliar sight, almost ghostly looking as it sat motionless, claw on the fish, staring at Will, the boat and elias’s body. The sea eagle was also an unusually long distance from the sea. Will believed it must have followed elias. The Phantom family knew the sea eagle well enough, although they never gave it a name. Will remembered being out in a high sea on a grey day, in a stormy sea with his father and elias, years before, when he was ten years old, and saw the sea eagle when it was a fledgling then, injured by another sea eagle perhaps. They all saw it drop out of the sky and elias plucked it out of the sea. For perhaps a year it hopped around on elias’s boat, never leaving it. A greedy, demanding bird squealing non-stop to be fed, whenever he saw a person move. Then, when they had all just about given up believing it would ever learn to feed itself, elias took it back to sea. He  was  gone  forever  it  seemed  to  Will’s  young  mind  so  he  went around telling everyone that elias was dead. one day elias came back and told Will the eagle was in the sky, but it stayed at sea, and lived  on  the  perpetually  passing  traffic  of  transport  barges,  ships and fishing boats. The eagle always came back to elias when he was out at sea, sitting  on  his  bent  back  while  he  fished,  wanting  to  be  fed,  and getting  a  bellyfull  of  good  fish,  until elias  headed  back  to  land. Now, evidently, it had come to a muddy lagoon, fishing with elias for reef fish, hovering hungry for days, waiting for one of the bags to be opened and fish offered to him as though he was incapable of fishing for himself and had to be fed, as though he had again been injured. It had grown hungrier and more disoriented, waiting for elias to  feed  it.  Yes,  yes,  Will  whispered  to elias,  it  would  be  put  right soon when the eagle picked up the sound of thunder rolling inland from  the  sea.  Will  watched  the  eagle  watching  him  for  a  few moments. He hoped that now he had his fish he would be smart enough to fly back to the sea once he heard the thunder clap and roll. The bird dropped the fish and sat looking forlorn on the log. Will turned his attention back to elias. With a deep breath, he confronted elias’s empty eye sockets staring straight into his face. elias’s presence felt so real, if it had not been for the missing eyes, Will would have sworn he was still alive and was playing a joke on him by pretending to be dead. The clouds  were  approaching,  wind  started  blowing  through the trees and the unnatural darkness which came with storms was settling in. Alone, with elias, he did not want to look at the dead man’s face which might tell him things of the other world he did not  want  to  know.  This  was  when  Will  saw  dried  blood  stains  all over the front of elias’s cream cotton shirt. The same stains covered the floor of the boat. elias had lost a lot of blood when he died. Again, Will saw the image of white men flash  by  the  other  side  of  the  boat.  They  looked  as  though  they were laughing at elias’s body, as though it was a joke. He placed his arm around elias’s body and picked up the human shell, weighing nothing. Words, which even surprised Will Phantom, raced out of his mouth, ‘I am going to avenge whatever it was that happened to you, elias. I am really sorry, old man.’ easy  now  to  make  such  a commitment  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  to  somebody  else,  and mouth the words with conviction. He  knew  the  old uncles  always  said  there  were  bad  omens surrounding  the  lagoon  in  that  heavy  foreboding  of  the  land before the Wet. They pointed to where the spirits had lain in the atmosphere, before moving freely in and out of the lagoon, while they turned normality into a nightmare. The clouds  ran  overhead,  and  in  the  distance,  he  heard  wild winds  tearing  through  the  woodlands.  He  moved  frantically, automatically doing what had to be done, to get the boat out of the lagoon. Blue plastic rope had been used to tie e lias down to his seat and  more  rope  had  been  used  to  secure  the  boat.  The  rope  was looped  tightly  around  the  boat  twice,  looped  over  the  front  and back. Working to untie other men’s work dissolved any idea he had which suggested e lias had carried his boat cross-country as just a foray into fantasy. The cloud front had reached the lagoon and a dust storm was only minutes away, so Will took a grip of the pile of loose rope left lying on the floor of the boat and started to lug it towards the edge of the lagoon. The wind blew red dust in ahead of the rain with the pungent smell of wet gidgee warning Will to get out of the lagoon. It was time to find some shelter. He knew if the rainstorm set in, there would likely be a flash flood through the area, and he would have little to no chance in the morning of finding the boat again. If  he  had  not  been  so  preoccupied  with  his  thoughts  about  the mystery of the fish and why the boat was in this particular lagoon, he  might  have  recognised  there  were  sinister  undertones  to  this unusual situation which had been designed to look so ordinary. He did not hear the droning engine of a machine in the distance until it was almost above him. The sea  eagle’s  blood  sprayed  over  the  lagoon  like  early  rain when  the  bird  took  off  in  fright  and  hit  the  rotor  blades  of  the helicopter  descending  at  high  speed  over  the  spearwood.  Will dived under the mud as the helicopter bubble, coated with blood, roared down towards him as the pilot tried to regain control and ascend the other side of the lagoon. Then, it returned at full speed and began to circle slowly above elias’s boat. The whorling blades stirred the mud into a turbulence that boiled into the air. Will went under  again  and  when  he  resurfaced  with  mud  falling  out  of  his eyes, he saw the bloody machine moving off over the spearwood, just far away enough to position itself to return. Will waved frantically , hoping they would see him, then as the machine drew closer on its return, Will caught a glimpse of the pilot and another man through  the  blood  and  muddied  bubble.  He  watched  while  the man in the passenger seat positioned himself to lean over the side of the helicopter with a rifle to his eye, aiming the weapon directly towards him. In disbelief, he did not react, or try to figure out how to save himself. There was so much happening in those moments as the helicopter swooped nearer and the flying water whipped his face, that he was not able to determine the identity of his pursuers. Assuming  they  were  white  men,  simply  because  they  were  in  a helicopter,  he  could  not  comprehend  why  they  looked  so  dark. Precious moments of saving his own life were slipping away, when it suddenly dawned on Will Phantom, who was unprepared for a trap by the company, that they were mining men, dressed in navy uniform, expecting his return. Idiot! of course they looked dark. He  re-entered  the  sightless  world  under  the  mud,  knowing that  somehow,  if  he  could  avoid  being  shot  at,  he  would  have  to get out of the water. The machine hovered close above him. His mind  running,  calculating  distances,  his  own  down  in  the  mud and  theirs  above,  and  breathless,  knowing  he  must  have  taken them by surprise, if it was him they were after. If he could get out he would have to run, but where to, he was not sure. All he had to  gamble  on  was  the  helicopter  not  having  enough  space  to land, convincing himself that this was so, otherwise why did it not come down? Not sure  if  the  man  was  firing  his  rifle  into  the  water,  Will moved away from elias’s boat, hoping it would be difficult for them to  see  him.  He  crawled  along  the  mud  floor,  camouflaged  by  the turbulence in the choppy waters covering the surface. Which way? The image of the log where the bird had sat sprung into his mind. He  was  almost  breathless  as  he  made  his  way  towards  it,  hoping, convincing  himself  that  it  was  the  only  cover,  his  only  chance,  to escape. He moved, quickly estimating he had correctly pinpointed the log from under the water, hoping that they thought he would stay near the boat. He  calculated  right,  the  right  length  of  time  he  could  stay submerged,  long  enough  to  bump  into  the  end  of  the  log.  He resurfaced behind it. Safe for the moment, he looked back towards elias,  only  to  see  the  boat  sinking  lopsidedly  in  the  turbulence. They had fired at the boat thinking Will would stay under it. Now, the  helicopter  was  taking  up  position  again  directly  above  him, then it flung itself back across the far side of the lagoon. He knew it was time to get out of the water – if they had not already  seen  him,  they  soon  would.  He  ran  hard  towards  the spearwood  with  the  deafening  noise  of  the  machine  closing  in behind him. He could not hear the rifle being fired. random shots into the gravel ricocheted beside him, from left to right. Shots hit the  ground  in  front  of  where  he  ran,  behind,  and  right  to  left again.  Will  thought  he  was  being  pursued  by  a  psychopath  with high-powered sights, or else someone was trying to scare him off. He ran as a wild zigzagging animal in full alert to danger, knowing it was being hunted down, became like rubber, flexible, bouncing, too hard to catch. The helicopter, accelerating to get up ahead of him, turned for the gunman to get a crack at him, face on. It was too late. He was running with a power he did not realise existed in himself, and he was approaching the cover of rocks in the gullies. But what neither party realised was, they had run out of time. The storm hit. Wind and rain fell in horizontal sheets across the valley, and the helicopter made a hasty retreat to the west, in the direction of the mine. Will  knew  that  he  now  had  the  night  before  they  could  try again, but if the rain kept up, it would not take long for the roads to  become  impassable  for  days.  He  sat  on  the  rocks  and  became just another dark shadow in the premature darkness of the rain, except when every minute or so lightning struck, and he was able clearly to see the surrounding landscape, and he and the lagoon in white light. In his mind he began surveying the open space that separated him from the town. Where would he find the best cover if the mine sent out more helicopters to find him? Perhaps it was just  a  coincidence?  He  decided  to  be  on  the  safe  side  he  would assume  the  company  had  a  memory  as  big  as  his  of  their  battles fought over mining in the Gulf. He would have to stay out of sight of search parties as much as possible, if the helicopter was likely to return in the morning, and then he thought about how careful he would need to be in desperance, after this. The rain fell in torrents and he knew even before he caught his breath,  he  would  have  to  go  back  down  to  the  lagoon  for elias’s body before the psychopaths from the mine had another chance to tamper  with  his  body.  Mozzie  had  told  him  about  the  poison festering  in  the  souls  of  the  men  who  disturbed  the  earth.  ‘The spirits  went  Blah!  They  just  spat  on  the  ground  like  a  piece  of rotten meat. They were listening to the truth, and they knew, and they looked to you, Will. You keep doing what you got to do.’ Will felt Mozzie Fishman’s presence, standing behind him, grinning and pointing  between  flashes  of  lightning  to  where  the  spirits  flew around  in  the  wet  skies,  speaking  quietly  about  the  mining  men, saying how he believed their work was just beginning by using e lias as their vessel.  Will could never escape the words he heard in his heartbeat. But, if the rain kept up, the creeks would flood through the lagoon in the night, and who knew where the body would end up, if he did not take it out now?  He went back into the lagoon, anxious to save elias before the water rose, and his own spirit shadow, one old ancestor, limped along to keep up with him. When he finally touched the boat in the dark, he found it was not entirely submerged and he was able to straighten it enough for towing out of the water. In the hours that  followed  getting elias  out  of  the  lagoon,  Will  took  the  tin boat and hid it behind a spearwood thicket leaning against a rise, about a kilometre away in higher country above the flood levels. Carefully  he  concealed  the  vessel  with  spinifex  and  dead branches,  until  he  was  satisfied  that  he  had  created  a  hide  as though nature’s hand had constructed it. Then he went back for elias  to  take  him  up  further  into  the  high  country.  He  was  not difficult  to  carry.  ‘We  will  get  you  somewhere  safe,  up  in  the hills,’ Will kept on talking, speaking to and replying for elias as though  he  were  alive.  ‘How  could  you  be  dead elias?’  ‘Well!  I can’t  tell  you  because…because…because  I  don’t  know  what happened to me.’ It was comforting to hear the sound of his own voice, to feel he carried a real man, not to think of the dried-out remains of the person who had helped to condition his life. He felt each step of wet, loose rock with his bare feet, as they climbed the rugged terrain as swiftly and with the sensitivity of mountain goats in total darkness, higher on the hill. Satisfied he  had  them  both  secure  in  the  hills,  and  sheltering from the rain under a rocky ledge he had located by sniffing where the kangaroos sheltered, he looked down in the distance and saw headlights  below.  He  observed  the  lights  of  two  cars  coming  in  a hurry through the rain in the direction of the lagoon. He could see how the car lights weaved about in the darkness, that the drivers were finding it difficult to keep the cars on the road at the speed they were travelling. ‘ elias, I don’t know what is going on here but someone seems to be in a big hurry coming along that road,’ Will spoke propped up  against  the  rock  wall,  sitting  beside  him.  ‘Yes,  if  they  are  not careful they will be dead too,’ elias replied. The vehicles continued to swerve back and forth across the road. Will slipped back down the hill, without ruffling a stone, to get a closer view of what was going on. The two vehicles stopped at the turn-off,  and  he  listened  to  the  voices  discussing  whether  to  take the vehicles down the steep dirt track, which was slippery now from the rain. Headlights and  searchlights  on  top  of  the  vehicles  beamed down the track through the rain. Water raced down the road like a river and Will watched the navy uniforms of six men, including his  two  older  brothers  – donny  and  Inso,  who  worked  for  the mine . It was a wonder they did not hear his thoughts. Perhaps his thoughts  were  blocked,  concealed  behind  the  rocks  on  the  other side of the main road. He watched the big dark frames of donny and Inso, sliding down the watery road to the lagoon in the black wet,  with  their  torches  jumping  ahead  of  them.  Two  others followed them. ‘What  we supposed to be looking for anyway?’ one brother spoke. All four were talking, and someone said he’d been told there was a body down there. ‘We have to look out for a little tinnie boat.’ ‘What’s that smell anyway?’ donny asked Inso, who said he did not know. ‘It smells like an animal, probably kangaroo fur.’ ‘Fish! You idiot, it smells like fish.’ ‘What fish? Animal fur when it’s wet.’ Will followed,  moving  through  the  spearwood  on  the  side  of the road. In previous times he would have sprung out in front of them  to  pick  a  fight,  their  fighting  marathons,  fought  until  one remained standing. d onny and Inso kept talking to the other two men about the rotting fish smell. ‘Can’t you smell it?’ ‘Yeaaa, I suppose so.’ Will heard his thoughts leaping out of his mind so loudly, he believed  they  were  hanging  around  in  the  heavy  humid  air,  like illuminated  balloons. donny  and  Inso,  or  the  other  two  men, jumpy  with  the  torch,  often  swung  the  light  around  to  shine straight  through  the  spearwood  trees,  as  if  they  were  trying  to locate where the stench of old fish was coming from. ‘There can’t be any fish here.’ It was too dry for fish, they said, laughing at the repetitious  topic  of  their  conversation,  and  the  absurdity  of  the lingering smell, until finally, because they were in good spirits, they agreed that the overpowering stench was the work of indigestion – food poisoning . A fish percolating in their own intestines. Will moved  in  closer,  moving  next  to  them  through  the spearwood.  Silently  his  feet  joined  the  paws  of  the  wallaby  and kangaroo,  feeling  the  ground  in  the  darkness,  belonging  as  if  to nothing of life. So, close, he listened to their heartbeat, so nearby, almost  standing  as  his  brothers’  shadow.  He  penetrated  their laboured  breathing  inside  their  lungs,  and  could  see  when  they waved the torches across the flooding lagoon. Yellow beams cutting across the bucketing rain, sheeting across the rippling water with the wind. He saw the shock on their faces when they could not see the  boat. oh!  Glory  be.  He  could  almost  hear  his  brothers  pray. They argued with the other two workmates, about whether it had sunk and whether one of them should go out into the lagoon and check. Just to make sure. Curiosity killed the cat. Will knew donny and Inso’s motto in life.  Not  one  of  the  four  men  volunteered.  No  one  wanted  to  go into  the  muddy  water  that  was  already  rising  with  the  rainwater racing down the steep surroundings of the lagoon, running black liquid over their boots. They heard all the dead things thundering down  the  hills  from  miles  around  with  the  leaves,  sliding  snakes, awakened crocodiles, rushing into the lagoon. It seemed as though all  the  wind  and  rain  on  earth  was  funnelling  inwards  with  the spearwood trees bent, pointing straight down to this little lagoon. Will  knew  that  even donny  and  Inso  saw  the  spearwood  trees become  the  spirits  blowing  spears  which  whistled  past  them  into the water. The technical bosses, talking back up on the main road, were minding  the  vehicles.  ‘Who  was  to  know,’  the  four  men  agreed, ‘that  we  did  not  go  in,  looking  for  the  tinnie  they  up  there  are after?’  Will  was  relieved  that  the  other  two  men  followed donny and Inso, and his brothers were true to form: the story of their life, always  willing  to  shirk  duty.  No  one  was  arguing;  there  was  total agreement. The four headed back up the road. While they walked up the hill through the running water and rain, occasionally they would shine their torches through the bush, perfunctorily,  perhaps  thinking  of  having  heard  a  sound  of  an animal. Many times the beams cut straight across Will, but he was a  mud  man  not  seen  by  others.  They  tell  the  others,  the  two supervisors, waiting with the vehicle, that the lagoon is starting to flood and the boat must have sunk. Their voices, practised, have a genuine ring of truth. ‘That will do anyhow,’ the technical men say dismissively, with authority. The technicians continued speaking, discussing the possibilities of  losing  the  evidence  in  the  floodwaters.  In  voices  that  speak quietly and without emotion, they discuss the forecast, the rainfall patterns, the jet stream, flood rates, all with a blank look on their wet faces, dismissing the ‘local knowledge’ given by the other four, whenever  they  spoke.  The  technicians  talked  about  concrete evidence – not the dead body nor the one they had earlier tried to shoot. The conversation becomes too detailed and monotonous for the likes of Inso and donny. The mine in their mind meant good food, as much as the money, and they did not want to miss out on dinner,  not  for  one  day,  not  for  anyone’s  business.  While  the technicians stand in the rain, Inso and donny and the two others sit  in  their  vehicles,  brand-new  four-wheel  drive  troop  carriers, navy blue under the mud, talking of stews and casseroles, excellent fish curry. Good food cooked properly by chefs, not just chucked around in a frypan in a pile of fat until it burned, and nobody to fight you for it. They smile and wait – nobody ever had it this good. They wanted to say if given half a chance about what was right – in   the  nocturnal  world  you  leave  the  dead  alone .  It  was  not  dead people who feed you. Inso and donny lounge back in the company’s vehicle. They are comfortable, just like they are in their own cars. They  are  thinking  big,  because  they  can,  earning  good  money down in the mine. They make veiled threats of leaving the mine for good,  waiting  for  nothing,  keeping  an  eye  on  the  time,  watching the technicians point up the road in the headlights, and thinking sourly – they can stick their flippen jobs . The four  working  men  tap  the  car  dash,  the  gear  knob,  the steering wheel, waiting, thinking about what the kitchen staff will leave  in  the  oven,  thinking  about  manoeuvring  the  vehicles  back over the sodden roads. They light up and wait in a cigarette smoke haze, listening to the commentary on powerful car radios, mostly they  say  nothing  to  each  other,  except  to  comment  in  expletives about the uselessness of the local football commentary on the local radio  station.  Listening  to  their  favourite  team  making  the  same mistakes  over  and  over,  when,   even  a  girl  would  know  better .  That useless referee again, Didn’t anyone know people listen to the cunt of a radio  and  even  depended  on  the  friggen  thing  once  in  a  while  to  get  the proper information? The technical  men  in  navy  raincoats  and  yellow  helmets  still spend time hovering over the front of their vehicle. They seem to relish  rain  dripping  down  their  nose,  spilling  off  their  faces  and hands.  Will,  standing  behind  their  vehicle,  hears  of  their  lengthy experiences  in  the  tropics  as  seasoned  troopers  of  many  Wet seasons, recalling all they remembered about floods in those parts. The smell of rotting fish hung glued to the air, as though it had came  from  the  rain  and  dirt  mixing  together,  but  they  did  not notice . ‘What  about  this  lagoon?’  They  speak  about  the  speed  of flowing  waters  in  the  height  of  the  floods,  travelling  floodwaters, racing at the speed of 200 kilometres an hour, and pausing at the fantastic knowledge of this idea, they come to the realisation that if there  was  a  remote  possibility  of  recovery  of  the  body  along  the river in the d ry season, it would simply be noted as a flood victim. Another  poor  soul  lost  to  the  river. What  else? If  by  some  sheer fluke, his body washed away to sea and was discovered, it would be like  he  never  left  the  sea  in  the  first  place.  There  was  nothing  to connect  him  to  the  mine  or  the  lagoon  except,  except  what? They said it was a dumb, stupid idea to put the body there in the first place. ‘We had to flush him out somehow from amongst those religious  freaks.’  But  Will  Phantom  had  got  away.  It  was  an accident – the storm came. ‘Well! A right cock-up. But we’ll get the bugger; it won’t take long.’ There was a further shorthand version spoken over the twoway  radio:  ‘The  target  was  off  course.’  Their  voices  sound confident: ‘ of course the target will be recovered.’ Whatever they do they are always confident. Why? They always have a strategy to keep  the  bad  ball  rolling.  The  technical  men  get  back  into  their vehicles,  then,  as  Will  watches,  the  vehicles  swing  around  on  the main  road,  again  the  headlights  pass  over  him  standing  in  the bush, but he remains invisible. Will Phantom is mud. At home on the sea, at home on the land… So  sang  the  windy  night  through  the  slender,  bow-bent spearwood  forest  below  where  Will  Phantom  slept  in  the surrounding foothills away from the road. The ghost-white underleaf of the wax-green foliage of the stick trees became a procession of spirits moving across the soft earth of darkness, protecting the country of the water people. ‘I will  keep  you  out  of  the  rain,’  he  had  promised  the  poor deceased elias,  carrying  the  body  so  light  it  hardly  weighed  a feather, hanging over his strong slender shoulder. Will had climbed higher into the hills, until eventually, he came to a large rock cave. Inside, the walls were covered by ancestral paintings telling stories of human history, made and remade by ochre paints, as the foref athers whispered the charter of their land. Will acknowledged their presence, touched the walls in places to embrace the timelessness of his  own  being.  He  felt  humbled,  honoured  to  be  in  the  home  of birds,  animals  and  clans  people  of  time  passed.  He  had  eaten  the meat  from  a  small  wallaby  he  had  caught  off  guard  earlier  and cooked;  it  had  been  a  glint  of  silver  eyes  shining  in  the  darkness, startled  in  its  solitary  cave,  then  its  life  was  snatched  with  bare hands. All night he kept the old man warm, and when occasionally he  stirred  from  sleep  he  stoked  up  the  small  fire  made  with  dry twigs and leaf litter accumulated on the floor of the cave. The  rain stopped early in the morning, but far off to the north across the coastline, the dark clouds were building up again at sea. The  hours  would  pass  and  Will  knew  it  would  be  raining  again before long. He felt cleansed by the refreshing air steaming off the damp earth as it lifted in pencil-thin columns of mist from the sodden bush. The atmosphere relieved him of his longing to return home after his lengthy, dry journey through a string of deserts with the Fishman. Now, in the context of having to look after elias, he had time  to  adjust  to  the  vicinity  of  home.  He  thought  he  needed  to spend a few more days in the bush adapting himself to being alive again,  to  breathe  in  moisture  from  the  frequent  showers  of  the storms. The discovery of elias was a clear reminder of the reality of what it meant, at least to himself, to be back in the Gulf country. He sat  outside  the  cave,  killing  time,  wondering  about  the prospect of elias killing time for eternity, while enjoying once again the sight of his country’s blue, green and red paintbox landscape, surveying  the  road  from  the  northern  tip,  down  to  the  southern horizon. He was surprised to see a vehicle, still a dot some distance away. It was the last thing he expected to see coming along the road which  had  overnight  metamorphised  itself  into  a  long  glistening snake river of muddy water. He  watched  the  dot  grow  larger  as  it  ploughed  through  the red water, listened to the roaring engine, and even though it had been years since he had heard the particular sound of an eightcylinder  funnelling  water,  he  knew  the  mud-covered  vehicle belonged to the travelling priest. He turned to elias and told him, ‘Some  decent  person  around  here  is  going  to  write  to  the  Pope about him one day.’ The bohemian priest, whose mind was that of a sixties hippie, was driving his car like a bat out of hell up the flooded road. every year  he  repeated  the  last  minute  journey  with  one  challenge  in mind – to beat his luck in the Wet just to confirm that God was on his  side.  In  return,  the  black  Valiant’s  souped-up  engine  roared profanities throughout the pristine neighbourhood. Will pictured the  big  hippie  priest,  a  red-skinned  gargoyle  with  flowing  white hair, settled comfortably back into his red vinyl bucket seat, basking in his Father’s glory, listening to the Philadelphia Tabernacle Choir singing in full throttle on the cassette player, occasionally taking in glimpses  of  the  surrounding  countryside,  but  taking  no  notice  of the  loose  exhaust  pipe  rattling  along  in  the  mud.  A  gambler  by nature, it was not just the Wet the priest loved to beat. ‘The priest must have heard the rumours, elias.’ Will paused in his thoughts for a word to elias, who was resting up against the wall of the cave . ‘What do you say elias, do we or do we not know Father danny?’ Will knew the priest was on his way to visit Norm, to compete with all of his godliness to win the old man’s devotion against the zealot Mozzie Fishman and his devotees. As he watched the car edging closer, shimmering through the sacredness of the flowing water snake, gathering storm clouds, the divine nature of red earth, what came was a holy car from the pale blue yonder, as though sent from heaven to commence the journey of taking elias home. Will thought how fate, although bewildering, was the nexus to hope. ‘You know elias I could easily drive back later on from town to get you.’ Will was surprised by the hollowness of his words, spoken without thought while knowing, staring down at the road, it would be cut off by the rains for weeks. There  could  be  no  question  of  leaving elias  behind,  even though it would be easier to come back later on to fetch his body in  a  borrowed  car,  driving  stealthily  on  some  still  night  when men unknown to anyone in the world went about their business un  detected. So easy Will could almost feel himself reach out and claim such a night for himself. He watched  the  priest’s  car  ploughing  along  the  glistening road across the claypans. red-coloured water sprayed out from the sides of the car. It was now or never, Will thought, knowing he had to decide what was the best thing to do, deciding to leave elias in safe care before he continued on with his life, and because he could not  help  himself,  slipping  in  begrudgingly,  ‘I  don’t  want  to  say  it but  I  have  got  plans elias,  I  have  been  away  for  two  years  you know,  I  have  been  putting  my  plans  on  hold  for  too  long  now, I  think I am going to run out of time.’  Yet lingering still with the caution of a jack rabbit, he sniffed the air, resisting the temptation to start heading towards the road, to be ready to flag Father danny down as soon as he was close enough. Somehow on that day, instinct kept Will up in the hills, inching him  back  inside  the  cave  as  though  gravity  was  working  against him, and all the while watching Father danny twist his way around the gullies, as the car climbed the road through the hills. It was just as  well  because  Will  heard  the  familiar  droning  coming  from  the distance in the east. It seemed that someone else had their eye on the red serpentine road as well, because, the drone grew increasingly louder, and very soon, the helicopter from the mine landed on the road just below the cave where Will waited for the car to arrive at the turn-off to the lagoon. ‘ Where are you headed?’ the men in uniform asked solemnly. The imposing  bulk  of  Father danny  remained  glued  to  his bucket seat, a feature which was deceptive to people who had not looked up to speak to his extraordinary six ten frame. He hardly moved an inch as he poked his head out of the car window, while in the true tenor’s voice of the Irish dales, and possessing an air of authority that did not go amiss when amplifying the voice he was renowned  for  boasting  about,  he  announced  cheerfully  over  the blasting Tabernacle Choir, ‘The Lord’s destination is desperance, my good man.’ The  two  men  respond  in  mock  cheer,  eyeing  each  other cautiously,  by  telling  him  he  ought  to  go  back  to  the  mine  with them  because  of  the  flooding  along  the  road. Abandon  the  car   – Father danny  envisages  a  stratosphere  of  riffraff  and  pillagers already  spoliating  cars  galore  in  his  mind’s  fancy.  Father danny deliberately notes his face in the rear-vision mirror outside the car window,  just  to  make  sure  that  he  does  not  look  like  somebody stupid or something, who leaves his car on a road out in the sticks for  nothing.  He  was  an  old  hand  on  people  who  spoke  in  veiled threats. He could count them all on his fingers and toes, and stayed put in his car, while eyeballing the two lean security men through his  bushy  eyebrows  – con  men .  This  was  no  sitting  duck  to  be ordered  around,  so  the  mine  men  talk  generally  about  the worsening weather. A mere trifling matter. The blasting music, not reduced one notch, continues to flow beautifully into the static of the  surrounding  saltbush,  conveying  the  aura  of  the  religiously spiritual in all worlds. The  priest  smiled  nicely,  mentioning  he  understood  their concern, and speaking in a firm voice, leaving no doubt about the authority of the Church, so he thought, said, continue he would. Sermon-like,  he  said  the  truth  of  the  situation  was,  that  he  had raced  through  saltpan  floods  a  thousand  times  in  his  life,  and always arrived at his destination, purely and simply because he was blessed. Blessed be, to have driven through the path in the waters God’s  holiness  created  for  his  servant.  Could  he,  he  asked,  tell them the story from the Bible of the parting of the waters? This was the time when God drove the mighty sea back by a strong easterly wind, to let Moses lead the Israelites to safety from the egyptians. Thousands  of egyptians  were  drowned  when  they  had  tried  to follow Moses, did you know that? So let us begin to pray. The  priest  begins,  but  the  men  interrupt  him,  first  with apologies for being unbelievers of any – all religions in fact. They still insist he goes with them, because he cannot go forward or back – The road’s blocked . Father danny’s speech continues, he has after all perfected the same routine thousands of times in the past for the unbelievers of the story of the Israelites’ dash through the parting waters.  Next,  in  a  sudden  change  of  tempo,  it  was  no  longer  a cordial conversation of well-wishers accompanied by sermon. Then came the vexatious shouting of who was going to make him leave his car sitting on the side of the road in the middle of nowhere for all the useless, thieving scoundrels of the world to plunder . ‘Not me,  not  for  no  one  at  no  time  –  get  it?’  Sprays  of  spit  for  the helicopter to be removed from up the road. ‘You got no right to park that piece of rubbish in the middle of the  road  like  that,’  the  Irish  voice,  a  far  cry  from  its  salicaceous lands,  rose  up  the  sides  of  the  rocky  hills  coated  in  yellow blossoming  spinifex  in  a  clear  booming  tone,  while  down  below, Father danny was continuing to stir the morning heat with a folksy barrage  of  wharfside  pub  abuse  imported  from  the  Motherland’s sagas of wars and rebellion, now applied to a lead ore mine in the modern day – like they think they owned the place! ‘Father,  Father,’  in  between  the  shouting  came  the  responsive soothing,  water-off-a-duck’s-back  tone  of  a  uniformed  man.  He tried  to  be  reasonable,  his  hands  levelling  the  invisible  weight  of things  in  front  of  him  in  a  gesture  for  calm.  When  the  priest paused,  he  continued,  ‘You  don’t  know  how  quickly  these  roads become impassable and once that happens, it is going to be months before anyone can get through. Father, we are sorry but we have been instructed by the police, so we can’t let you get stranded in an isolated area with the roads flooding.’ ‘don’t tell me what is or isn’t impassable, I have been travelling like a bloody donkey up and down these roads for years, so get that contraption out of the way,’ the holy voice rose. ‘ or I’ll be getting out of my car and be moving the contraption, holus-bolus darn it, off the bloody road, with my bare hands, myself, if I have too.’ The men steadfastly refused to take the helicopter up without him  on  board  and  the  priest’s  voice  echoed  through  the  hills  for the Holy Ghost to deliver his church, be it but a humble motor car, to  safety.  Then  Father danny  revved  the  vehicle  until  the  engine was  full  throttle  and  roaring.  Will,  smiling  down  on  the  impasse, wished donny and Inso were there to see their old coach having a go, in broad daylight, instead of sneaking around the bush at night. The helicopter pilot who had been standing across the road having a  smoke,  froze,  his  blood-drained  face  registering  total  disbelief, then turned, ran and jumped into the helicopter. one of the other men wrestled with the priest for the key to the car which he was trying  in  vain  to  pull  out  of  the  ignition.  The  other  mine  man, brandishing a knife he had taken out of the sheath attached to his belt,  circled  the  front  of  the  Valiant  in  a  primordial  crouching position, and slashed all of the tyres. Air rushed out of the wheels within moments, leaving the car sitting on the wheel rims. The two men tried wrestling with the pugilistic priest, now red-faced with anger,  who  had  by  God’s  will,  so  he  announced,  been  given permission to fight like an ordinary man. The priest spoke in a grave voice to the two men circling him, one with the knife, saying he had no intention of leaving his car or ever  to  fly  in  a  helicopter.  ‘The  only  flying  I  was  prepared  for, before you desecrated the holy tyres of the Lord’s cathedral here, was rally car driving, and the final day when hopefully, I might lift off on the lightness of stored virtue if it pleases the Lord to fly to the kingdom of heaven.’ A little bit of local knowledge always went a long way, and it was considered as being respectful in these parts not to pick a fight with the priest. Father danny was a prize of the Gulf. Locals knew his background  as  an  ex-heavyweight  fighter  when  he  was  young  in his former diocese down South, in the big smoke’s poor streets in a  formidable  place  like  Sydney.  If  that  was  not  enough  for reverence, they also knew the kind of Irishman he was, because he had told them he had been bred on brine fish, and the sea winds, and a good fight on the Irish docks. He had in former times been an advertisement of triumph for the common masses, a poster of promise hanging on the bedroom walls of the country’s youth, the nation’s hope for olympic gold. But the good Lord called him up right on the eve of the big fight and said to him, ‘Hey!  danny, I will be needing a strong man like you elsewhere.’ Well! Father danny just dropped Ireland like a hot potato, and he cried out behind him, as he walked off, ‘Flame fame!’ In haste to  be  gone,  he  barely  left  enough  time  to  say  goodbye  to  his Mother,  let  alone  farewell  to  the  Motherland,  before  he  jumped with the excited energy of youth onto the next ship sailing halfway around  the  globe.  He  travelled  for  six  hundred  days  through numerous lands, soils and weather, impatiently asking the Lord if this or that was it, until he found the place of his calling. So it was, the late sunlight shining on the wide tussock saltpans in the bush diocese of the Gulf of Carpentaria was for the Irish pilgrim. If you watched Father danny over thirty-odd years of teaching Christianity through  the  art  of  boxing,  song  and  abuse,  you  saw  for  yourself that holy sacrifice could be given and received with joy, through the  many  good  fighting  Catholics  Father danny  had  created  in the makeshift boxing rings from lines drawn on the beaches of the Gulf,  through  salt  down  in  the  salty  claypans,  or  on  the  red  soil with the spinifex shovelled away. ‘You  better  be  off  you  boys  before  I  get  me  temper  up,’  the priest  snapped,  and  started  to  whistle  the  hymn  playing  on  the cassette,  while  edging  the  men  towards  the  helicopter.  With  the dockland  instinct  of  perceiving  every  Joe  Blow  on  the  street  as being out to fight you still pumping in his blood, the priest hoisted the  two  men  into  the  helicopter  then  slammed  the  door  of  the capsule shut behind them. The helicopter blades went spinning for take-off, filling the air with sucked up bits of dry grass, turpentine scrub, plastic bags and dust, that covered Father danny  standing next to the door laughing, until it nosily lifted itself up from the ground and with an immediate swirl, all that was left was the sound of  heavenly  voices  in  a  Te deum  of  three  massed  choirs accompanying the plastic bubble darting across the sky. The priest, triumphant  trumpets  accompanying,  rubbed  his  hands  with  the pleasantness of having just completed mass, although the words he uttered through a mouthful of dirt were Irish jewels best left lying on the little known roads of the outback. overhead,  the  heavy  clouds  moving  their  empire  south  began raining steadily while Will eased his way down the side of the wet hill  sure-foot  on  slippery  rock,  carrying elias  over  his  shoulder. Father danny,  wet  to  the  gills,  was  repairing  his  four  punctured tyres as fast as his heavy weight allowed. From the side of his eye, he caught sight of movement through the rain but the strangeness of the form did not interest him as he laboured over the tyres. He kept working, lost in thought, counting the minutes of the heavier rain moving up ahead, miles away over the coast, to hit places in the claypans where he envisaged the rising waters would spill over the  yellow  river  road  and  turn  the  whole  plains  country  into  an inland sea. Who would get through then? ‘Should have  known  I’d  be  paying  for  something  connected with you,’ the wet, and now muddy priest mumbled nonchalantly at Will, from under the chassis, where he was lying, as he continued denouncing  the  car  for  being  a  useless  bucket  of  tin.  Will  could hear more than he could see of the struggle under the car to keep the jack from sliding and the car from falling on top of him. ‘ And if you got a problem, don’t bother me with it, or bother me with any of your futile excuses about why this happened or that happened.  I’ve  had  a  bucketful  of  lies  already  today.  Look!  Stay there will you? I’m not talking to you! I am talking to this bloody car  here  before  the  bloody  jack  slips.  So  what’s  your  problem this time? God! This used to be a safe place before you lot started arguing and mucking around with that bloody mine. And another thing, since you are here now, you want to tell me why you got a dead man hanging over your shoulder? Are you going to tell the police  about  it?  No,  don’t  bother,  I  don’t  want  to  know,  young trouble  makers! I bet you can’t even be bothered in your thick skull about  going  to  the  police.  Well,  I  won’t  be  burying  him  if  that’s what you want unless you go through the proper channels, so don’t come pestering me to do it.’ Father danny hurled himself out from under the car with the grace  and  noise  of  a  wounded  elephant.  Will  said  nothing.  He never spoke much to the priest anyway, never saw eye to eye with his religion. Instead, he took the liberty of easing elias’s body and his sacks across the back seat of the car. The priest took no notice, preferring to concentrate on removing the tyre from the wheel rim at the rear end of the car. He told Will to get a move on and help him with fixing the tyres if he wanted a lift, so they could get the hell’s  name  on  the  road  or  they  would  both  be  swimming  to desperance. ‘ double  blast  for  that  helicopter,  hey,  son?’  the  priest  said mockingly, in a better mood, when twenty minutes later, he threw the tools back in the boot of the car. The car was ready to go. The car  flew  up  the  road  drawn  like  a  straight  pencil  line through the flood plains. The priest kept his foot flat down on the accelerator.  His  dexterity  and  control  over  the  steering  wheel belonged to an inhuman kind of power, Will observed, but it did not  matter,  if  he  succeeded  in  keeping  the  car  on  the  road  while slipping  and  sliding  from  one  side  of  it  to  the  other.  Meanwhile, they  both  saw  that  the  floodwaters,  spreading  across  the  flood plains, would soon obliterate the road. ‘Perhaps,’ the priest hissed as he lunged over beside Will’s ear, in order to be heard over the engine and rain, ‘perhaps, it’s going to take the combined force of you and me, camaraderie, my friend, an esprit de corps between two men, to get us through. What do you think, Master Will Phantom? You reckon we can trust in God to get you home?’ Will chose silence. Let the holy man talk his legs off.  The  land  was  full  of  spirits  which  might  help  the  heavenly power of the Irish to tilt flat land and push the Valiant home. He thought of the dead man spread across the rear seat of the black car,  stared  ahead  at  rain  splashing  the  yellow  waters,  feeling  the cool air moving across the flood, and that was enough satisfaction, to be on the road home. Father danny said he felt good. Will thought the mud-caked priest was pumped, spurred by the success of getting the car back on the road, a triumph in dire conditions. The monologue rolled on  and  on,  as  Father danny  spoke  with  enthusiasm  about  the craftsmanship  of  the  humble  Valiant  and  the  ingenuity  of  the lone traveller on bush roads. Will searched for the watery road across kunbulki  – flat country. He felt the silence. The priest did not  see  silence  by  acquiescing  to  silence.  For  him,  the  land opened his crammed mind. ‘ out here a man can get a chance to let  some  of  the  good  ideas  escape  into  the  wilderness,’  he claimed.  He  proceeded  with  a  stunning  commentary  about  the potential of bush mechanics, their ability to get through any crisis, and what he would have done if he had been travelling without this tool or that. ‘ The  question  is,  would  a  man  cope?  Would,  for  instance,  an ordinary man, not an astronaut, someone scientifically trained, but a  practical-minded  ordinary  man  from  the  bush,  if  he  became stranded on the moon, have the potential to make his way back to earth?’ It was because the potential of bush people was underrated that this kind of research was not being done. Will, at this point, became mildly interested in the talk, linking what Father danny was talking about with the old people’s stories of uptown. Periodically, uptown folk claimed they had been taken away by UFO’s and had, somehow, either been placed back in their homes, or scanned their way back through the galaxies, simply by applying the cut and thrust of practical bush skills. Will said nothing and let the talking Valiant swim its way through the floods. Always sceptical of Father danny’s theories, he would not allow himself to become a captive audience, like his parents, and all the others who listened and watched, waiting for the legs to fall off a chair. The sound of a human voice, even if it was his own, seemed to help Father danny’s concentration on the road. ‘Watch out jurrbu , jurrbu  – hole in ground here.’ The priest spun the car, righted the outcome,  and  the  oratory  continued  into  a  lecture  about  road bandits – heavy vehicles loaded with mine machinery headed for the mine, using the road, who thought they had the right to take over  a  man’s  right  of  way.  ‘There  were  laws  that  protected  the public  user  of  public  roads,’  he  said  while  the  car  slid  and  Will looked  at  Father danny,  who  did  not  seem  to  notice.  ‘It’s  what happens  when  men  lose  sight,  lose  their  vision,  of  democracy. Power, that’s what destroys democracy, education used to destroy the rights of other people. It’s gone too far this time Will, too far, this mine, using technology to control people. Very unwise. They cannot crush people just because they have the power to crush the landscape to smithereens.’ So many  good  words  were  wasted  that  day  as  Will  Phantom stared past kunbulki  and into the past itself. It was still raining and even though still afternoon, appeared to be  almost  night-time  when  Father danny  dropped  Will  off  with elias’s body at the bridge on the edge of town. He roared off into the  lights.  The  first  place  he  was  going,  he  told  Will  before  they parted, was straight to the police station to tell Constable e ’Strange he had a fat lot of complaints to lodge about mine staff attacking him  on  the  road.  Will  thanked  the  priest,  then  set  off  into  the darkness,  camouflaged  in  his  mud-stained  clothing  by  the  dense olive-green undergrowth of prickle bushes. He skirted  along eastside,  then  passed uptown,  past  others camping on Westside, staying out of sight, carrying elias, until he reached  Norm’s  place,  where  he  moved  unnoticed  through  the shadows of prickle trees at the back of the house. The house was quiet,  and  Will,  knowing  his  father  was  able  to  identify  a  person approaching the house from the distance of a kilometre from the sound  of  their  movement,  was  pleased  there  had  been  no  one around in the late afternoon. He made his way to the old man’s fish workshop which was separated from the house, although it was an extension to the fortress itself. Both buildings were joined together by the long crooked corridor constructed of corrugated iron which appeared always to be half finished by not having a roof. He laid elias’s body and the sacks down on the dirt floor of the workshop. ‘I will have to leave you here with the old man,’ Will whispered to elias. He knew his Father would want to look after elias himself. It was the reason for bringing him home. In  the  golden  half-light  Will  gazed  around  this  familiar, favourite  room.  Soon,  without  realising  what  it  was  that  was happening to him, the faint odours of chemicals that had hung in the  workshop  forever,  robbed  him  of  the  years  of  absence  and troubles.  Like  autumn  leaves,  bad  days  fell  away  as  though  the genius of the room could not retain them. Will became tantalised by  the  seamless  possibility  of  rushing  widdershins  back  into boyhood habits, seeking the latest piece of magic his father was working on. It was here in the amber womb that each member of the  family  had  come  to  lose  themselves  in  their  father’s  world  of fantasised  hidden  treasure,  as  they  watched  Norm  intricately creating  fish  jewels  of  silver,  gold  and  iridescent  red,  greens and blues. ‘We used to spend a lot of good times here, didn’t we old man?’ Will talked on, whispering to elias while gazing around at the walls covered with fish. Norm Phantom had been given the great skill  of  robbing  the  natural  function  of  decay,  by  the  act  of preserving all species of local fish, and the walls of the room were covered with mounted barramundi, coral trout, bream and salmon. Will  studied  the  crowded  rafters  which  were  decorated  with hundreds of butcher’s hooks, and from each hook hung preserved fish in gleaming silver attached to a strand of fishing line, three or four to a hook. The dangling fish in the workshop always appeared more  alive  than  dead.  Hours  had  been  spent  by  the  family watching Norm patiently scraping out the guts of fish, boning the flesh like they imagined a surgeon would have done, and they went oh! and Ah! when eventually Norm held up the bare fish skin for inspection. There were secrets inside Norm Phantom’s head about the  plants  pickling  in  bottles  lining  the  shelves.  The  liquids  he brewed came from the plants he collected in night journeys in the grassland bush. He used the juices sparingly to tan the thin skin of the fish specimens given to him by all kinds of people – redneck fisherman,  rich  businessmen,  politicians,  scientists. What  do  you reckon mate?  All kinds of people turned up at Norm’s rusty gate to drop off some fishy thing wrapped in newspaper. Norm unwrapped  the  fish  at  the  gate,  quietly  studied  it,  and after  several  minutes,  he  would  say  so  if  he  felt  he  could  do something with it. even the guardian angels hovering in the skies above  were  in  awe  of  Norm’s  decision  to  return  life  to  dead  and rotting  fish.  Norm  waited  for  the  response  as  though  it  did  not matter  to  him  while  the  stranger’s  money  antennae  shot  up, eyebrows twitching with excitement, to haggle what was fair: ‘Ten dollars  ought  to  cover  it.’  World-class  professionalism,  Leonardo da Vinci for a bargain . how will we know you will finish the job?  Norm might  have  done  the  job  for  nothing.  His  mind  was  light-ages away, mingling with the axis of symmetry in the spirit of the dead fish. only  craftsmanship  could  resurrect  what  lay  stinking  in  his hands. The kids, running with the men to their cars, overheard the fisher  men feeling  hard  done  by,  slamming  the  car  door  behind them, grumbling as they observed the Phantom kids. Well! you don’t want to be ripped off by them either. Will ran  his  hand  haphazardly  through  the  open  bag  of horsehair used for stuffing his father’s fish. He loved the texture of the hair, and for a split second, an old habit wiped away the years of  their  disagreement,  and  the  time  returned  when  horsehair would  be  washed  clean  and  dried  by  him  until  it  shone  for  his father’s  liking.  He  stood  examining,  inside  an  enamel  basin,  the skin of a barramundi soaking in the tanning mix. He moved by, passing his hand over bottles of preservatives, sealers and lacquers. He remembered how Norm would give him the task of patiently stitching the skin together around a mould of the horsehair. His small fingers had become so adept to using a needle and thread, he was  able  to  make  the  stiches  so  small  and  tight,  the  seam  was invisible to the naked eye. Will studied his hands now, fully grown, and  wondered  with  light  mirth,  how  his  father’s  huge  hands achieved  the  task  of  an  elf.  Afterwards,  Norm  spent  many  hours and  several  days  to  paint  the  fish  with  painstakingly  steady movements with a small paint brush. This was the time when there was total silence in the workshop. Norm painted, and the children watched over his shoulder, at the miracle he performed restoring the original colours with paints he made from ochre and plants. These, he said, were mixed using the secret  measurements  of  life,  and  pearl  shell  crushed  into  a  fine powder.  All  his  painted  fish  possessed  a  translucent  gleam  of under-the-sea  iridescence  made  from  the  movements  of  sun  rays running  through  the  wind  currents.  God  creates  God’s  friends. The  angels  helped  him,  the  children  were  told.  Perhaps,  Will thought, viewing a glistening coral trout’s ocean-blue dots, slowly spinning at the end of a thread, children were mischievous elves, while men with big hands were angels. From  time  to  time  Will  still  thought  about  the  childhood beliefs he had of his father. Sometimes while sleeping, he felt that his  father  went  to  live  under  the  sea  in  his  sleep,  in  a  world  of colours that normal people would never know existed. This image he sustained, of Norm living under the sea in his dreams, was the only explanation he had of why his Father was able to paint fish so delicately and true, as though it were his second nature. In the  accumulation  over  time  of  hundreds  of  bottles,  none labelled,  lining  the  shelves,  the  startled-faced  children  watched Norm  reach  for  whatever  he  wanted,  without  checking  first  if  he had  the  right  one.  Somehow  he  could  remember  what  he  had stored down to the last bottle. It was like magic, and children talk. Phenomena like this was what interested the thoughts of the people of eastside, the jarrbikala-policeman and the uptown  kadajala . The family had lost count of the times that Norm had replaced the bottles, and restored the collection to its exact position, after the workshop was searched and his collections of poisons temporarily confiscated  by  the jarrbikala .  When  the  policeman  came,  the Phantom  kids  cringed  like  the  dogs,  with  their  backs  flat  against the walls, trying to attain a powerless invisibility. Immobilised by fear  of  being  seen,  they  listened  to  their  thumping  hearts  race when  they  watched  their  father  being  taken  away. each  time  he saw  his  father  leave  the  house  with  a  policeman,  Will  thought  it would be the last time he would ever see him. on  these occasions he implanted the image of his father’s face in his mind, in case it was forever. He would always have the stoical expression on the face of his father leaving to remember, and being too frightened to think  of  the  terrible  consequences  if  this  would  be  the  last  time they would ever see him again. Will  fingered the wooden workbench, running his fingers along  where  Norm  had  instilled  in  him  as  they  worked  the  fish together  to  never  have  one  thought,  one  vision.  ‘ one  idea  could get you into so much trouble, boy, you might never know if you are dead or alive for instance. Sideways, you always want to be looking out when someone serves you up a drink – might be a cup of tea or a glass of water. Never let them. They could be serving you up the worst kind of poison.’ His father  had  found  a  dead  countryman  once.  He  said  he found him at the tip, when he smelt a human being rotting where he  poked  a  stick  around  in  the  muck.  ‘My  country  what  are  you doing  here?’  Norm  asked,  angling  for  the  man’s  spirit  to  come forth  and  purge  the  wrong  done,  and  when  he  got  no  answer, Norm had walked around in the putrid mud searching for clues, while a million flies, buzzing to and fro in one big black mass, never stopped following him. He was convinced, he claimed, that the flies tried to push him away. Perhaps they were hiding something. He kept waving the black demons away with his free arm and a stick from  a  bamboo  thicket  bulldozed  from  the  artesian  bore  up  the road, and dumped at the tip. Although the vile stench tried to pull him down into the palace of death, he continued blindly forward, choking  back  his  vomit,  until  he  stumbled  upon  a  pile  of  dirty housewife’s  kitchen  rags  and  pieces  of  cardboard  marked  Cocoa butter,  which  he  flicked  away,  and  there  he  told  police,  he uncovered the  corpse.  The  body  was  actually  stirring  about,  and Norm, both repulsed at the sight and thinking it was the devil in personification,  rising  up  to  get  him  because  he  never  went  to church  on  Sundays,  said,  it  was  in  those  vital  moments  until  he came to his senses that he believed the cadaver was floating off in midair.  Then  he  realised  it  was  riddled  with  maggots.  ‘Get  the police, run quick,’ Norm said he snapped at his children, who he claimed were with him at the time. Well! Aren’t no business of ours ,  that  was  what  the  police  said. They said, through Truthful, it was not reasonable to expect them to  muck  around  with  anybody’s  body  in  such  an  awful  state  of decomposition. Other  siders’  business ,  that  was  what  the  muffled voices  said  behind  the  industrial  masks,  as  the  whole  stinking lot,  treated  like  any  kind  of  animal  carcass,  was  quickly  and unceremoniously  shovelled  into  a  body  bag,  zipped  inside  of another and another, and air-mailed off that fast to a city hospital. ‘The  police,’  Norm  said  with  a  spit  reserved  for  whenever  he referred to the police, ‘had spent that much time pursuing him just for finding the body, there could not be enough hours in a day for squestion   this  and squestion   that.  Well!  They  could  have  been  out doing what the decent taxpayer paid them to do, catching the real criminals,’ instead of making him look like the guilty one. But some people said, it was no good what Norm Phantom could have done. So, throw enough mud – some sticks. It  was  any  wonder  everyone  started  thinking  Norm  was  a murdering  criminal  type,  with  the  police  just  about  wanting  to marry  up  with  him,  by  the  way  they  were  hanging  around  his property. even his wife Angel d ay started to get jealous of all of the attention Norm was getting. She threw things at the police when they  came.  She  demanded  to  know  what  was  really  going  on. ‘Your  Mother  is  a  very  suspicious  human  being,’  Norm  casually mentioned  to  Will  at  the  workbench  after  the  police  had  come cruising up and down, passing their place at all hours, staring in, searching the premises and then driving away in their police cars with bits and pieces of his hobby . Whatever for, well, who knows ? o ver the next few days everyone started putting two and two together and ended up with light bulbs flashing! Forget evidence, forget police investigation, forget fact. here we have forensic scientists in every household who had no need to surrender themselves to fact. The Phantom household tried in vain to keep calm too. Than  the chemical analysis revealed the man had been killed straight out. Analysis came back, not quick smart from the hospital, but  saying  anyhow,   This  man  was  killed  with  the  worst  poison,  1040 . 1040? 1040! everyone knew about 1040. Word got around about 1040,  saying  it  was  being  made  locally  –  Aboriginal-style.  Will remembered  the  endless  string  of  people  coming  to  their  house, standing around in the yard with Norm, speaking in whispers with the palms of their hands capped to the side of their mouth, as if it would  block  the  kids  from  hearing  what  they  had  to  say,  that someone with this 1040 was well and truly up to no good. At the time, people would arrive one after the other and he could still feel their presence radiating fear around the yard, and saying whatever they had to say to Norm. The yard was the place where all theories about the mysteries in  life  were  tested  that,  later  in  life,  Will  would  reconstruct  as  he struggled  to  remember  the  stories  of  the  old  people  on  the  road with the Fishman. That 1040 someone , it was whispered,  might have run away now to somewhere else because he knows he is in trouble with the law, but, it could be he is still around, trying to make people weak with poison . i  saw him in my dream and he was the death angel who looked like swarming bats packed together, taking the shape of a giant bat shadow flying across a starry sky in the middle of the night, crooked and zigzagging, like lightning, then he shook himself out flat to make himself appear in front of you like a human being with sly, downcast eyes . Even if the 1040 killer stopped doing it for a while, you cannot be too careful – he might say he is finished fighting with you, but you never know, he be friends with you for awhile – Oh! good way, but not really. When you are not using good eyes for looking, not thinking about anything, he will put something in your drink to make you get weaker and weaker, then you die. Always watch this. Then people stopped coming over to the Phantom place. These were  the  reasons  why  Norm  Phantom  had  always  told his children never to let anyone get them a drink even if it was only water, because it could be the 1040 killer giving it to them. Norm believed  there  was  only  one  fundamental  principle  for  longevity and this was never to depend on others. This he would suddenly announce to his children out of the blue – ‘Because, who could you trust,  eh?  No  one  really.’  As  children,  Will  recalled  the  deep impression his father had on each of them, as someone of such total adroitness they were convinced he could fathom anything he chose from  the  depths  of  life.  His  children  should  have  been  in  the forefront of survivors in this wicked world with a father like Norm Phantom to guide them. His persona, his aura, lived constantly in their  line  of  vision,  constantly  diverting,  even  hanging  around  in their sleep, always ready to catch the bad dreams. dream  and  reality  blurred,  of  children  standing  on  the foreshore  watching  their  father  fade  over  the  sea  horizon  only suddenly to turn back, coming never close enough, to hand signal an  almost  illegible  message. other  times,  they  were  distracted, when suddenly he would appear behind the backs of people he did not  like,  using  hand-signal  language  at  a  rapid  speed  to  say whatever derogatory stories he wanted about them, to the utmost embarrassment of his children. Never trust this bat-eyed dog. Tell this smelly piss trousers to get going. hE iS AS USELESS AS A BrOKENBACK  SNAKE.  Tell  him  to  piss  off. The  banter  of  hand  language subsided only when he got them to do what he wanted. Their place  was  guarded  by  black  angels.  Will  remembered being  told  that  by  the  old  people  who  said  when  it  was  a  good clear  day,  they  saw  plenty  of  these  angels  going  about  the  place clutching their javelin weapons, looking for the snake that stuck to the place like glue. Will said they were hawks. Blessed or cursed, or whatever Norm Phantom believed, his face was unnatural, almost as black grey as the head of a fish he once caught. The old people called it worry for the snake. Will did not believe the snake lay in the  ground  under  their  house.  The  snake  he  once  saw  was  the living  atmosphere.  Its  body  stretched  from  horizon  to  horizon, covering each point of a compass, and encasing them all. His father looked in all the wrong places, for the air flowing in and out of his nostrils was the snake. Will dismissed the vision, but he could call it up, if he wanted to. Will sometimes saw the dead people who sought out his father in  the  workshop.  They  were  local  people  mostly,  coming  over  as soon as they found themselves becoming dead persons, frightened, not knowing what was going to happen to them. They could show up, in person, or else send someone else instead to grieve for them. Norm had as little time for the deceased as he had for the living, telling one and all: ‘What you want to come here whingeing for? Am I God? I am not God, so go to your church, you idiot.’ It could have been that Norm talked too much to himself without realising it. This was what he said he believed. He claimed he never knew the difference. He did not know whether those people turning up in  his  life,  popping  around  his  place  to  have  a  good  old  cry,  or telling tales, were either dead or alive. So,  once,  he  chased  all  the  illusions,  apparitions,  spectres, persons  of  the  otherside,  off  his  prickly  bush  patch,  and  back  up the  churned-up,  mud-dry  road  and  through  the  main  street  of town as though it too were an illusion, a town that never existed. Who  knows  what  anyone  thought  about  seeing  him  chase nothing, telling it to go to hell. did he stop, come to a halt, like an exclamation mark, when everyone of good nature shouted at him to  stop  as  much  as  the  spinster  aunts,  agitating  like  tarted-up Pekinese dogs because he was frightening the children? No, he just kept  on  running  like  middle-aged  men  do,  with  his  green  stick, until  he  was  two  steps  short  of  entering  the  other  side  of  town. once,  Will  recalled,  following  his  ghosts,  Norm  did  momentarily stop  to  ask,  ‘ did  you  hear  that  pin  drop?’  It  was  no  wonder  the whole town thought Norm Phantom was mad. Forever calling him to  explain  himself:  ‘ don’t  you  go  snobbing  me  Norm  Phantom,’ one of the aunts shrilled, her voice cracking the air like a whip. The only  good  thing  was  that  the uptowners  did  not  know what  to  do  about  certifying  black  people,  and  claimed  they  had learned  to  live  with  ‘harmless’  insanity.  It  was  part  of  the  North. Although their town was very old, the uptowners never knew what demons were being chased. Nobody living in the middle of a war zone knew it existed. even in a war of extreme intensity which had been conducted with such a high level of intelligence it had lasted at least four hundred years. But that was uptown. Will lingered, looking over to where elias sat, thinking about the  town,  about  being  back  home.  He  was  beginning  to  feel  as though  he  had  never  left  being  Norm  Phantom’s  son,  who  had gone against the conventions of the family and their war. He broke the rules. It was the first time in history, or so it seemed to all and  sundry  in  the  Westside  Pricklebush.  Could  it  be  that  he  was different?  It  did  concern  him  to  have  flaunted  responsibility without conviction. Why did he not cart the ancestral, hard-faced warrior  demons  around  on  his  back  as  easily  as  others  in  his family were prepared to do for land? They were good people, and the old people were bent over, so stooped with carrying their load of this responsibility. He had asked himself, and again now in the workshop  with e lias:  ‘It  was  good  enough  for  them,  why  isn’t  it good enough for me?’ Will  sighed  deeply,  gave  the  bench  a  final  light  tap  before leaving the workshop. He knew he had already failed the obstacle course, had slid down this track many times before, wasting time on  a  futile  examination  of  his  conscience,  knowing  there  was  no answer. It was just no use trying to feel remorse for letting others carry their war, his war, an inheritance that belonged to him, as much as he belonged to it. He could only give a clinical glance at the  proudly  worn  combatant  scars  of  his  relatives  when  they boasted of the battles in the middle of desperance. Will carried no scars,  only  the  dark  brown  birthmark  straight  down  his  left  leg. The old people recorded the reappearance of familiar old family scars in the newborn, so that four hundred years worth of events could be remembered in stories of ground battles, sea battles, and not forgetting the air battles either, they claimed. Don’t ask how , the old people said, just because it was widely recognised that the white man invented aeroplanes and the black person was believed not to have had aeroplanes. And a good job too, because you never know if they are going to land at any right place, except probably, into a big mining hole in the ground; you go into it and that will be that. Don’t trust engines. Trust your intuition and of course you will see Aboriginal people flying themselves around and no reported crashes yet. They said Will’s scar came from such a battle that took place in the skies with sea eagle spirits over the Gulf sea, long before he was born. A way from the house, Will felt great throbs of sadness vibrating through the rain from Norm’s grief when he discovered elias. The rain  fell  over  the  saltpans  and  over  the  sea  for  hours  that  night, then Norm heard the oars swashing through the shallows, as Will rowed out to sea. 

Last Wishes…  The  fishroom  never  kept  the  silence  of  the  dead.  For  years Norm  Phantom  knew  this.  Peculiar  things  happened  in  his workroom where he competed with the spirits of who knows what, to make fish from the sea come back to life, to look immortal. To hang in schools by the dozen, suspended in oceans of air, stranded, attached, much like himself, unable to swim off into distant horizons. Mortality did not belong in this room. occasionally,  he  lamented  that  one  day  he  would  die,  and saluted his premature epitaph, Who would look after all of this then?  oh !  Sad.  His  was  the  lot  of  an  isolated  man.  The  twin  in  his isolation: quiet, unassuming, humble pie. Was it any wonder such a  man  would  make  other  peculiar  claims  too?  After  hours  of laboured work, when finally holding in his hands the masterpiece, he claimed it was not he who had created it. Why would he make up such a story the old people said: Listen! Who did he think he was kidding? He was kidding himself. everyone knew the hours of toil  Norm  Phantom  put  into  creating  his  fish. desperance  being what it was, a modest place, humble people believed in real facts. only real facts created perfection. So it was. People were not fools. W hen  nobody  believed  the  story  spread  by  Norm  Phantom about  not  being  the  maker  of  his  work,  he  kept  his  beliefs  to himself.  These  were  the  fascinating  secrets  of  the  fishroom. Secretly,  Norm  remained  convinced  that  others  helped  in  such exquisite creations, something much more powerful than himself. A  supernatural  master  artist  who  created  miracles,  a  dalliance of God consuming the room as an experimental studio, a type of  exposé  for  life  in  the  decaying  world,  where  the  air  smelt like a beach. In this bewildering scenario, Norm acknowledged himself only as being the original creator of the workroom. This was true. It was through a glimmer of thoughts like that, that Norm realised what had really happened to the room he had built with his bare hands. In  a  fascinating  growth,  when  the  preciousness  of  the  new  fades with  no  one  noticing,  the  room  had  changed,  evolving  into something else. Inexplicably, without messing about, in came and dwelt a powerful spirit with grander goals, a perfectionist who spat dead  lizards  of  scorn  at  human  beliefs  of  what  was  perfect,  who loved  to  play  ‘touch  up’  with  a  humble  man’s  work.  So,  Norm Phantom, with such gorgeous ideas flooding his mind, was able to skirt  around  the  true  origins  of  his  genius  –  the  twin  unfetching forces  of  envy  and  competitiveness,  matters  that  often  sustained him  in  dealing  with  his  family.  Plain  old  truth  was  undeniably becoming the diminishing factor in his work with the fish. T he  seeds  of  thought  can  be  very  enterprising. once,  when very weary in the middle of the night, and while still stooped in his intricate restoration of each colour-drained minute scale of a king trevally back into silver, one at a time, so as to have the job completed by the morning, for a common ‘madman’ who did not deserve to have caught such a magnificent fish, Norm had been disturbed by the light flickering, pulsing like a heartbeat. Steeped  with  ideas  so  enormous  they  could  be  tracked  as chaotic  enterprises,  matrices  of  chaos,  and  suspecting  the  reason why the light was pulsing, he began to understand that the room was  like  a  pickpocket,  robbing  people  of  their  memories.  Norm accused the room of becoming a hoarder of other people’s secrets of the heart. What he saw for the first time that night was as real as anything he had ever seen in his life; it opened his eyes, and from then on, he was able to see other things in the room. As the room matured,  Norm  saw  it  was  bending  inwards,  steeped  with  the weight  of  holding  one  miraculous  discovery  after  another.  It occurred to him that all truths were being accumulated. Poor truth sucked straight out of the minds of all the unrighteous people who came to admire his handiwork. Sometimes, the room appeared to be absorbed by quietness, as though it was reading its secrets. He continued his work, and paused, when he heard the rustling of a page turning inside the walls. over  time,  Norm  preferred  not  to  take  his  eyes  off  his  work until it was completed. He merely blinked when he heard the room working, and carried on, rather than have to endure the time lost from a distraction which served no purpose. He especially did not want  to  see  what  other  people  thought  stacked  up  around  the room like bundles of newspapers. Finally, with the last dab of paint drying  on  his  trevally,  Spanish  mackerel,  long-whiskered  catfish, codfish,  whatever,  with  the  same  single-mindedness,  Norm Phantom  renegotiated  his  way  out  of  the  workroom  through  the crowded space. Norm  suspected  that  nobody  else  could  possibly  be  aware  of where  the  unexpected  heaviness  had  come  from,  the  heavy breathing people said they felt in the room, which they said was swimming  against  their  skin.  Norm  kept  the  room’s  mad  secret from other people. For those who had experienced its weight, the fishroom  was  the  one  pitiful  place  in  the  whole  of desperance where  most  other  people,  except  family  members,  were  eager to  leave,  unknowingly  with  less.  All  manner  of  people,  usually oddball  fishing  men  of  all  walks  of  life,  from  all  places  of  the globe,  made  similar  excuses  to  let  Norm  get  on  with  his  work  – Think i   caught old so-and-so’s flu again . He had heard people say it a thousand times. They said they preferred not to interfere with the great artist at work. The old people never went inside. They said they did not like to go inside strange houses. Norm saw unsuspecting people, uncomfortably but impulsively, give  up  their  tight-lipped  family  secrets  which  had  been  passed down  through  the  ages.  What  poor  people! especially  those  that did not even know they had been carrying the secret knowledge of generations passed. Well! They spilt the beans to the fishroom. one time, Norm told the old people he had a dream about the room. He told them that every house had a spirit, and in his house, the spirit’s brain lived in the fishroom. The few who heard Norm talk about his theory said it was too far-fetched, but Norm argued that once the spirit consumed the original room, it became the likeness of the room itself. In fact, it was a complete replica of the original room.  His  story  was  too  strange  even  for  the  old  people,  who  in return,  accused  him  of  making  up  stories  to  frighten  them  away. Norm  kept  thinking  his  own  thoughts  anyway.  He  said  nobody could stop him. It was during this time of realisation, a haunting that the old people  wanted  nothing  to  do  with,  that  Norm  had  become distracted from the calling of his art. He felt he had lost something. He felt he had lost his touch. He spent more time listening to the hawks  harking  above  the  roof.  He  said  he  was  too  distracted  to conspire against death with his fish. He lost faith. He was wasting time  casting  his  eye  around  the  room  and  seeing  the  walls watching him with a sustained look of amusement. The fish from the sea just remained plain dead. Work was never finished. decay and rot began to take over. The room taunted him and everywhere he saw death, robbed by the years, now laughing in his face. Great schools of fish conjured from the sea were sent scattering in every direction  through  the  cyclonic  air.  Norm  fled  the  room,  running through enormous weights of water to drown his conscience in the hub and tub of a psychotic Pacific ocean collapsing through eons of compressed time. A  truce was made however, and whatever Norm did to re-create life  in  the  fish  he  preserved,  it  was  amazing.  His  fish  looked  like priceless jewelled ornaments. e ach piece was better than the last. He  became  a  master  known  throughout  the  land.  This  was  the reason  why  people  came  from  all  directions  of  the  world  to d esperance  to  have  their  fish  preserved.  Yet,  no  matter  how masterful  he  was,  he  knew  the  ever-watchful  other-worldly  spirit had more work to do. It remade the fish more beautiful to the eye, casting a replica of colour through the empty nail holes in the roof, shining where the dazzling rays of sunlight, hitting onto the scales of fish, left them forever glistening silvery gold on colours of green, grey, blue and pink. Years  passed  with  the  winter  winds  blowing  south-easterly  in weekly rhythms after midnight. Like nobody else, Norm loved the grand old composer, the rapturous melodies which swam along the tin walls of the corridor from the house to the fishroom. The music arrived in the middle of the night and tapered off after midday. The  breath  of  music  at  this  time  of  year  made  the  old  people camping  on  the  cold  ground  outside  move  their  blankets  as  far away  as  they  could  from  the  house.  They  said  the  house  was haunted. They did not like the old star in the night working close by  to  where  they  were  camping  because  it  was  flaunting  the afterlife. Norm sang Gloria , alongside the old composer conducting his  mass  choir  of  crickets  that  sang Glory!  Glory!   in  time  with  the rattling walls. The crickets, part of the fishroom’s metamorphosis, lived  in  the  dark,  musky,  fish-smelly  environment.  Packs  of  these creatures had moved into the room in magic droves, having come out from under a maze of stubby grass and leaf litter in the bush, to  live  in  the  nooks  and  crannies  of  dark  places  inside  the  walls, behind  jam  jars  full  of  chemicals,  or  under  benches  groaning with  the  weight  of  plastic  baths  full  of  fish-skin  tanning  fluid. dozens of the gleaming fish hanging off the rafters sang eerie songs in  shrilled,  mezzosoprano  voices  that  floated  out  of  their  mouths from  the  crickets’  hidden  nests,  from  deep  inside  the  fishes’ horsehair bellies. ‘ Bloody this and blast that about the ozone layer,’ Mrs Angel day lamented in her heyday as Queen Bee of the household, after yelling across the rooms of the house for the confounded radio to be turned down. Norm Phantom refused to listen to people complaining. In his quest to find answers to his theories, he was addicted to news on his  radio.  Constantly  twiddling  the  volume  knob,  any  news  item about the hole in the ozone layer would be blasted to a crescendo through  the  house.  For  he  had  a  puzzle:  ‘Was  the  chorus  in  the fishroom  a  new  strain  of  crickets  caused  by  the  hole  in  the  ozone layer?’ He told his wife such a thing had never happened before. He asked  the  question:  ‘Could  mere  crickets,  normally  a  curse  to mankind, have developed the ability to chirp through the noise barrier?’ A thousand times he had asked her: ‘What  do you think?’ For Mrs Angel day, the sound the crickets made was like listening to plates smashing. ‘What do you think?’ Such goings on in one ear and out the other, drone,  drone, meant nothing to her. She said she did not give two hoots, but the sound was driving her mad, and he could stuff any stupid scientify  ideas he got from city people talk up his butt. ‘They wouldn’t know about here would they? If they did we wouldn’t be living here like this, would we?’ Norm excused his wife for not acquiring a modern sense of refinement, such as a fine ear for the kind of music he liked listening to. She said the crickets were mutants addicted to inhaling those chemical fumes he used for tanning, ‘Gone mad, like yourself!’ explaining further to prove her point, she proclaimed, ‘They don’t live anywhere else in the house, do they?’ This was the truth. Norm kept  his  old  ventriloquist  cockatoo  away  from  the workroom, in case it learned to chirp like the crickets. The bird was regarded as a genius for its unusually quick knack for picking up sounds.  ‘Mark  my  words,  you  keep  that  bird  of  yours  away  from there otherwise I’ll guarantee you this one thing Norm Phantom, his little pile of bones will be licked clean by every baldy old camp dog  in desperance  to  kingdom  come.’  Mrs  Angel day,  as  the  old people referred to her in those days, had threatened many things on numerous occasions, more than her other veiled threats about leaving Norm which she finally did, although not on account of the crickets. She always started off or ended her threats with an added conjecture – ‘Mark my  words,’ and you better believe it, sooner or later, she did whatever she threatened. In the early days when Mrs Angel day ruled the roost in the Phantom  household,  reigning  supreme  out  in  the  front  yard, she  often  sat  in  a  pram  kept  from  her  last  born  which  she  had converted  into  her  chair.  This  was  the  spot  from  where  she complained to the old people about the loud chirping noises of the crickets.  She  said  it  would  drive  her  to  divorce  one  day.  The old  people  said  the  noise  must  be  too  great  for  her  nervous constitution. If she ever saw her husband pass by, an occurrence which  was  not  frequent,  she  complained  to  him,  saying  it  was always left to her to save the marriage: ‘If you had any sense you’d shut  up  your  noise.’  Veiled  threat!  Veiled  threat!  Norm  always felt  she  was  insinuating  that  he  was  personally  responsible  for summoning up all the devils that came into her life. ‘Inadvertently you  might  be,’  she  claimed,  and  the  old  people  looked  away. ‘You will ruin our marriage by your ignorant inadvertent.’ ‘You’re hearing things,’ he told her. In truth, she did blame Norm for all of their bad luck, often stringing out piece by piece all the things that had gone wrong, starting from day one, New Year’s day a long time ago, when they first met. ‘What New Year’s day was that?’ Norm  Phantom did not remember any New Year’s anniversary. every time she mentioned it, it was like a slap in the face, but he never  told  her  that  she  was  wrong  about  the  date.  He  let  it  be  a reminder to himself of her infidelities. Instead, he accused her of having  a  disease  she  had  picked  up:  ‘Must  be  from  one  of  those other  men  you  were  with  before  me.’  He  furthered  his  claim  by announcing  to  the  old  people  sitting  around  pretending  not  to notice  what  they  were  arguing  about,  that  she  had  passed  the disease  onto  her  children  when  they  were  born.  ‘What  disease?’ she retorted, although not denying her experiences before Norm. He  told  her  it  was  a  disease  which  makes  people  too  sensitive  to sound,  where  they  turn  into  maniacs,  they  become like  police .  He said  he  would  not  have  been  surprised  if  his  children  wanted  to become jarrbikalas . Norm Phantom went around telling the whole world that his family had some rare disease which made them overly sensitive to noise,  although  he  claimed  they  were  ‘stone  deaf  when  a  man wanted some simple thing done to help him around the place.’ At the time Norm was spreading false facts about his family’s hearing disabilities his good friend elias was one of the few who disagreed with him. elias claimed it was not logical that the entire family had hearing  problems.  He  told  Norm  he  did  not  know  what  he  was talking  about,  because  anyone  who  was  half  deaf  in  one  ear  and stone deaf in the other, was going to hear less than a person with normal hearing. Norm was annoyed by elias’s insult and retaliated, saying if a man could not remember who he was, then surely he was not in the  position  to  make  sound  judgements  on  any  other  matter. Norm was so fully convinced of his own superior hearing in spite of his in  ability to hear most normal sounds, he decided on the spot to  write  out  another  attachment  to  his  many  scribbled  last  wills and testaments he kept in a locked toolbox. In front of elias, he plonked on the kitchen table an inch-high pile of ‘last wishes’ to be performed after his death . He wrote with a heavy hand, another document with a biro running out of ink, in broken traces of red writing that tore through the ruled page. ‘ up on his death,’ Norm declared,  ‘his  eardrums  be  gouged  out  by  the  police,  butcher  or any nurse, anyone (up to performing the request), except the one connected  with  the  underneath  date  (namely elias  Smith),’  then he  instructed  –  ‘Put  em  into  a  sticky-taped  clean  plastic  bag.’ Instructions followed for the package to be covered with clean ice in a six-pack esky (which should be big enough), and stored in a cool room at the hotel or the butcher shop, until the arrival of the mail plane . ‘Then send the lot to science,’ he finally scrawled at the bottom of the page. It was  Angel day  whose  wishes  came  true.  After  a  devil  of  a windstorm  made  the  final  decision,  blowing  south-south-west  by eighty degrees, the fishroom was rebuilt away from the house, at the end of the twisting snake of a long and rusty corrugated-iron corridor that remained featureless, and provided no windows. Another requiem was being chanted when Norm discovered the body  of elias  in  the  fishroom.  In  fact,  it  was  the  intensity  and loudness  of  the  sounds  made  by  the  crickets  that  had  brought Norm running through the house, down the long corridor, with a  million  wild  thoughts  running  through  his  mind.  Scenes  of death  surrounded  him.  The  music  was  so  strange.  The  sound tumbled  through  his  heart,  mingling  pulsing  blood  with  the music for the dead. Norm froze the order of his reality. He struggled to maintain the surreal fresco of fishermen coming to collect their trophies. It was  a  day  when  he  had  to  get  the  tanning  fish  skins  ready  to mount. He had a lot of work to do. With the requiem sounding like engines  drumming,  he  felt  his  hands  shaking  as  he  fumbled  to open the door. The sound did not stop as it normally would have when he entered the room. A cold shiver ran up his back, around his  head,  flashes  of  nightmarish  times  spent  in  hazardous  seas jumped in front of his face. In the midst of the wreckage of all these storms, now racing through his mind, he looked around the room, suspecting his family, expecting to see a little pile of white feathers, the cockatoo dead. The mere thought abhorred him, and then he was  surprised  to  see  creeping  into  his  mind  the  banned  son,  the one  whom  he  never  thought  about  anymore.  He  stood  uselessly, searching,  knowing  it  was  pointless  to  push  the  unwanted  away. The  treachery  felt  in  the  room  was  profound,  but  the  obstinate father let him remain. He needed to check the skins, and as he tried to walk over to the  tanning  baths,  only  his  eyes  responded,  darting  warily  to  left and right in time with the flickering phosphorescent light overhead, while  his  mind  became  more  disoriented  with  the  noise  whirling him into a vortex of blue-black clouds, spinning with his memories. His legs felt disconnected from the rest of him as though they were walking ahead of the rest of his body. With his long arms, he reached for the bench to stop himself from falling heavily on the ground, only to feel his hands land on something soft. under them he saw the crumpled bags he could not remember seeing before, not lately, or ever. His eyes caught sight of a putrid coral trout and in disgust, he immediately pulled his hand away. As he looked at the  rotten  fish  in  the  bags  in  a  stunned  silence,  he  immediately thought someone was playing another trick on him. Similar things had happened before. Stupid sorts of people would turn up with old fish with an expectation that he could work miracles. He would look his admirers in the eye and say that there was no one on earth who could make their wishes come true. Had they ever come across such a person? Someone better them himself? A person who went about  converting  rotting  decayed  bodies  into  jewels?  He  threw their fish in the stinking bin at his front gate. dreams come and go, or come to a halt, as had the crickets, as though  a  certain  shocking  vibration  had  simultaneously  struck their  antennae.  The  alarming  silence  was  almost  as  deafening  as the  piercing  high-pitched  orchestra  had  been.  Norm  looked around  him,  convinced  something  terrible  had  happened,  and knew in that instant, that there was someone in the room looking at him. This was when he saw elias, recognising him straightaway, profoundly  ghostly,  enveloping  them  both  in  death,  then  disconnecting, as his heart cried out loudly with the pain of being torn apart. His friend sat slumped against the wall. Norm cried from the pit of his stomach, like a lost creature of the earth, until the end of all things roared from his mouth. The  tragedy  did  not  end  there.  It  had  only  just  begun  in  the Phantom family that day when elias had come home . ‘Look! A felony! Look! It’s a bloody felony that has been committed against  elias,’ Norm screamed repeatedly at the three sisters, his daughters, who  had  come  running,  jostling  each  other  like  getaway  thieves through the corridor, and thinking their father had had a heart attack. The youngest brother, kevin, was still strapped to his bed, thinking  his  father  was  being  killed  by  the  ‘othersiders’.  He hollered incoherently and jerked the straps around like a madman to free himself. His mouth became full of froth and he cursed his sisters in a stream of spit, but was ignored. easily exhausted, kevin ended  up  moaning  long,  breathless  guttural  sounds,  as  though they would break his captivity. No one came to untie him. Janice, Patsy and Girlie stood there in the fishroom, staring in absolute  puzzlement  at  their  father’s  outrageous  behaviour.  They were speechless – he wasn’t having a heart attack . Then they saw he was pointing to a man sitting on the floor against the wall. In the wildness of the moment, seeing a dead man with skin tanned to the colour  of  old  parchment,  long  muddied,  hair  tangled  with  twigs and  grass,  none  of  them  recognised  it  was elias.  Girlie  said  it looked like one of those mummified egyptians you see unwrapped in a foreign museum for a television documentary. None saw it as male or female. They looked blankly at each other, ignored Norm who was still screaming about felonies, then saw the decaying fish. Together  they  thought  aloud,  ‘ evidence.’  Then  Girlie  said, ‘P- o- L-I-C- e  in capital letters. The police will be coming here.’ knowing that the whole town already suspected their father of being a murderer, they talked rapidly about how to get rid of the fish,  how  to  get  rid  of  the  body,  how  to  rid  the  workroom  of  all traces  of  evidence.  None  of  the  daughters  went  near  the  father, who  was  now  leaning  in  a  slump  over  the  workbench.  All  three were  apprehensive  about  what  they  thought  in  the  presence  of their father. They stood well back. With a long piece of wood, a disused oar, Norm swung around wildly in the room sending the tanning fluid splashing  through  the  air.  The  crickets  were  silent.  The  sisters were relieved. Patsy said, ‘Let him do it if he wants to. If he wrecks anything, at least it will be his own things, not ours.’ Then the sisters worked fast, even Janice who was complaining she did not want to miss oprah Winfrey. They ran back and forth across  the  room,  avoiding  Norm,  who,  even  though  exhausted, occasionally  swung  the  oar  at  them.  Then  they  raced  up  the corridor, through the house, past kevin  who  was  told  to  shut up, and out the front door. Minutes later Norm was distracted by the suffocating smell of burning rubber. When he looked out of the window to locate the source of the smoke, his heart felt as though it had jumped into his mouth. He saw  the  blaze  of  fire  and  billowing  black  smoke  pouring  off  the molten  blue  bucket  dancing  on  top  of kevin’s  collection  of  play tyres  which  were  being  twisted  around  like  a  hurdy-gurdy  in  the intensity of the heat. He ran out of the room, cursing the stupidity of  the  incredibly  long  twisted  corridor,  then  through  the  house, ignoring kevin, who intensified his feeling of being a cursed man who  had  been  dealt  another  blow  of  stupidity  by  his  family:  they were destroying the evidence. ‘ It’s  the  bloody  evidence.  What  do  you  think  you  are  doing with  that?’  he  yelled.  ‘You  idiots.’  The  girls  ignored  him.  The fumes of burning plastic and rubber were continuously refuelled as they threw more and more metho onto the flames. He lunged vainly,  trying  to  grab  the  metho  bottles,  as  each  daughter sidestepped out of range. ‘Put it out, put it out,’ he roared at them, but, it was as though he was not there. ‘What a bunch of no brain idiots,’ he could not believe it. He banged his fists together. Girlie looked, but took no notice. She had just seen the monkey beating his fists without his tambourine.  He  shouted,  furiously  stressing  each  syllable,  saying he could not believe the mongrel breeds he had brought into the world. They took no notice and kept looking up the road in case anyone was coming . Where were the fishermen – why hadn’t they come? He  looked  up  at  the  black  smoke  to  see  which  way  the  wind  was heading, if it was heading towards town, and sure enough, it was just as he expected. The black smoke was being picked up by the south-easterly breeze, which was sending it like a giant black worm, straight into desperance. God’s  truth!  How  unlucky  can  a  man  be?  Norm  knew  the whole  town  would  be  standing  out  on  the  street,  looking  up  the road towards his place. everyone would be wondering – What the heck  was  happening!  Why  was  Norm  Phantom  burning  tyres? Why  was  he  burning  them  in  a  big  bonfire  in  the  middle  of  the day?  They  would  be  surmising  to  each  other  about  what  he  was trying to get rid of. In a small town like desperance, people knew about  burning  incriminating  evidence.  Anybody  with  any  sense burnt tyres at night-time like the mining company. The black smoke stretched out, spreading across the rooftops, and  the  soot  fell  onto  the  white-painted  walls  of  the  houses  of uptown.  Phones  rang,  ringing,  matching  thrilling  voices, exclaiming to each other their indignities against Norm Phantom for  doing  this  to  them.  It  was  thrills  for  everyone.  Norm Phantom  knew  there  was  a  certain  drill  that  operated  against him  amongst  the  houseproud,  double-chinned  maidens.  The busybody  matriarchs  were  quick  smart,  already  jamming  the telephone  line,  calling  up  the  nice  Constable  about  those Aboriginal people in the humpies over on the west side of town. They  were  at  it  again  –  burning  rubber.  ‘Could  you  be  a  dear and go down there and see what you can do about it, Love?’ Janice, Patsy and Girlie worked on in a haze of fumes, possessed by the mesmerising height of the flames; still ignoring Norm, they stoked the fire to even greater heights. Suddenly Norm noticed the big daisy chain dress was missing; Big Patsy was nowhere in sight. His  heart  slipped  a  beat,  then  another.  He  yelled  at  Girlie  and Janice to find her. He thought she had been engulfed by the fire. His chest tightened, he felt he was going to have a heart attack. But Patsy returned. Now he could see her struggling towards the fire with the body of elias. Norm tried to stop her by pulling her back from the fire, and almost collided with Janice. With a panicky voice, she told him to get away from the body. ‘We have to get the police,’ Norm shouted, pulling at each of their clothing, trying to haul them back from the flames. ‘ No,  get  away  from  us,’  Janice  said,  shaking  herself  out  of his grip. ‘ The police will be involved, you can’t stop it. They know.’ They edged  closer  towards  the  hideous  bonfire.  Norm  was unable to hold back the two big women working with all of their weight  against  him.  They  would  burn  all  of  the  evidence,  Patsy said, and that would be the end of it. He could almost taste their anticipation that all would be well again. ‘Burn the  evidence?  You  can’t  burn  the  evidence.  What  are you, an idiot? You can’t burn elias like that,’ Norm tried to tell her, in disbelief that they were calling elias the evidence, a man who was like an uncle to them. ‘Who do you think you are talking about?’ ‘Get out of the way, dad. Just you keep out of the way,’ Patsy kept saying, trying to push past her father, while he held her in a headlock. Girlie ran back into the house after she heard kevin making an  almighty  racket  on  the  corrugated-iron  wall  next  to  his  bed. When  she  went  rushing  into  his  room,  she  saw  him  shaking  his head violently from side to side, hitting the tin wall each time with a  horrible  loud  thud.  His  baffling  eyes  were  staring  into  space. She knew he could not see her when he became lost in this other nightmarish  realm.  Nobody  knew kevin’s  world  anymore.  She felt sorry for her brother. She saw white froth and vomit all over his  face,  falling  back  into  his  mouth  and  nostrils. kevin  was drowning  in  the  stench.  Seeing  his  face  had  turned  purple,  she knew  they  had  to  untie  him  very  quickly  and  get  him  into  an upright  position.  It  was  not  the  first  time  the  family  had  almost killed kevin by tying him to his bed. each time only sheer good luck had saved him when someone got there in the nick of time. Soon  enough,  they  were  all  trying  to  save kevin,  while elias’s body was left on the ground, out in the yard. ‘I told  you  you  shouldn’t  go  around  tying  up  your  brother. I  told  you  I  never  liked  it,’  Norm  reprimanded  Patsy,  as  she struggled  to  undo  the  straps  that  were  tightly  buckled  across  his chest, stomach, thighs and ankles. kevin wanted to speak to them but his mind felt ancient, as though it needed to come back across the  mountains  of  a  million  years,  to  learn  many  languages,  to  be understood. He wanted to tell them he had seen Will, who had also crossed the mountains and come back to them. Will had come to visit him from the graveyard of a thousand sailors in the sea. kevin had grown up believing that Will was dead because no one would mention his name in the house. He imagined himself searching an armada of war ships becalmed on a flat sea, searching the faces of those long-forgotten sailors, trying to find Will. Conversation remained elusive for kevin. He could not choose to  tell  them,  because  it  might  have  been  a  dream,  or  they  might think  he  was  seeing  things,  because  he  did  see  ghosts,  and  the snake  spirit,  and  other  spirits  of  the  ancestors,  and  spirits  of  the dead people who said his father had killed them. They all came to tell him the future but nobody believed him. Will had come back home and said, ‘Hello bro, why have they got you strapped up for?’ And  something  happened  that  never  happened  before.  His  bro touched him on the head with his hand and it had felt real. He wanted  to  tell  Patsy  that,  while  her  head  was  bent  so  low and  almost  touching  his,  but  it  would  be  better  to  choose  Girlie because  she  listened  to  whatever  he  had  to  say,  understood  his lingo,  even  while  both  of  them  knew  that  he  was  talking  stupid again. But his head kept throwing itself from side to side and he could not stop it. The more he tried to control himself, the more upset  he  grew,  and  his  stomach  tightened  with  the  vomit  which kept  coming  up  the  back  of  his  throat,  and  he  was  struggling  to stop himself from choking again. even in the midst of all of this, kevin  was  determined,  because  Will  said  he  should  hold  on, because  he  was  going  to  come  back  and  get  him.  That  life  was going  to  be  really  alright, kevin  thought,  slipping  past  the  faces staring down at him. He wanted to be with Will; he always wanted to be with Will. ‘ Can’t you see what you stupid people have done. I don’t want any  of  you  girls  around  here  anymore,  you  hear  that?  Bring nothing but trouble. For heaven’s sake, can’t you useless idiots see he’s  going  to  die  like  that,  he  is  going  to  die,’  Norm  was  crying loudly, almost in Patsy’s ear, but she took no notice. ‘ Patsy  stop  it,’  Girlie  demanded.  She  was  frightened  and nauseated  by  the  smell.  She  thought  she  would  fall  on  top  of kevin if she could not get out of the room. ‘You are useless, useless, you are all useless,’ Norm cried, tears running down his cheeks, as he unbuckled the straps and grabbed kevin,  pushing  him  up  into  a  sitting  position  and  holding  him tightly to stop the convulsions, until the choking sounds subsided. ‘You know, this must be the worst day of my life, seeing my poor friend  like  that,  poor  bugger, elias,’  Norm  said  to  his  daughters when kevin  had  calmed  down  and  fallen  asleep.  Girlie  made  a pot of tea and they sat around the kitchen listening to Norm talk despairingly  about  the  day  being  worse  than  anything  he  had been through in his entire life – cyclones, his wife walking out on him, the lot. ‘ A  storm  at  sea  was  better  than  this.  Trapped  for  days  with  a broken leg in a swamp full of crocodiles. Malaria too, and don’t tell me  you  can’t  get  malaria  in  this  country.  Your  Mother  never believed anything except her own self. even when she left – it was a  celebration  of  good  fortune.  I  said  good  luck  to  her.  I  felt  like I  won the lottery. I felt plain bloody rich compared to this.’ The girls ignored him. They were thinking up ways of talking to him about the body. They had to get rid of the body because it would eventually end up being tied to the family. It was still out in the yard.  Absentmindedly, Girlie tapped the teaspoon – rat-a-tat tat , over and over on the table. Norm told her to stop it; it was making him feel mad. She kept tapping. Finally, Norm grabbed the spoon from her and said he had made the decision for the family. ‘We got to tell the police.’ ‘You can’t tell the police,’ Girlie snapped. It was not the end of the  day,  nor  the  final  decision.  It  was  just  the  start  for  Norm Phantom’s daughters in dealing with their father. ‘What are  we  going  to  tell  the  police,  “Someone  put  him  in there”?’ Janice said. ‘“Who do you suppose put him there?” They’ll say you did. That’s what they are going to say.’ ‘We got to tell them we don’t know because that’s the truth, the start and the finish of it,’ Norm replied. Girlie was  pouring  more  tea  into  her  cup  but  did  not  notice that  it  was  splashing  over  the  table.  As  far  as  she  was  concerned, although  she  never  said  so  to  her  father’s  face,  he  brought  them shame. He got accused of being a murderer or being mixed up in one  after  another  of  the  strange  deaths  in desperance,  or  whenever anyone died. She already suspected him of having something to do with elias’s death. She kept asking herself how well she knew her father. How many times was she and the rest of the family, not counting the big brothers because they were big champions around desperance, who loved a fight, but the rest of them, weren’t they the object of ridicule in the town because of him? What happened when she and Janice and Patsy were abused by the other idiotic families from over the other side of town? Well! In a nutshell, no one intervened, not even the policeman who liked to  watch  women  fight  from  a  distance,  when  the  big  ugly  cows struck, ganging up on them in broad daylight, in the middle of the main  street  with  pieces  of  broken  bottles  and  whatever  else  their slack-arse  hands  could  grab  to  use  to  fight  the  Phantom  sisters. What did the bystander do? Well! He just watched. It was a circus, that’s right, a circus for white people, hanging around like dogs to watch black women fighting. She had lost count of the number of times  she  had  been  chased  out  of  town,  like  a  dog,  by  those mongrel cows with their beer cans and bottles they hurled at her back  for  target  practice.  Then,  after  a  few  days,  with  a  smile  on their nasty faces, they said hello, as if it all never happened. That was what black sluts do as far as she was concerned and she had the scars to prove it. ‘It’s not up to you Girlie,’ Norm snapped at her as though he had been reading her mind and it annoyed him that she lacked the nerve to tell him. ‘ Police don’t care about our truth,’ Patsy spoke. She had vivid memories  of  putting  together  her  Mother’s  house  again,  and again, and again, after the police had rampaged through it to their heart’s content, with or without a search warrant. It did not matter because if the police had not done a thorough job, the white men from  town  came  afterwards  and  wrecked  the  place.  When  that happened, they were flat out putting themselves back together, let alone the darn house their Mother had loved and forsaken all else for. ‘ Police don’t care about our truth,’ Norm repeated in a sarcastic tone.  He  said  they  had  to  make  them  believe  their  story  of  what happened,  because  if  they  said  nothing  it  would  all  fall  back  on them one day. ‘Just you wait and see.’ ‘ Anyone  home?’  a  male  voice  from  outside  disturbed  the discussion in the kitchen. ‘ Anyone at home? Anyone at home? There’s nobody at home,’ Pirate,  the  grease-coated  cockatoo  who  had  been  carried  to  the desert to be blessed by a pope, called back from his perch in the cedar tree. The mean-spirited bird was plucking cedar berries and throwing them down onto the mess it had created on the ground, where the Constable stood, staring at the smouldering fire. ‘Well! What did I tell you? I knew this would happen,’ Norm said, almost whispering, in a tone of satisfied resignation. ‘You tell them nothing dad, or you will get us all into trouble. do you know who brought elias here? do you know? It must have been Will, that’s who,’ Girlie explained. Norm looked  straight  into  her  face,  ‘You’ve  seen  that  bastard haven’t you and you didn’t bother telling me? If it was that bastard, too right I’ll be telling our friend out there, you just watch me.’ ‘No you  won’t dad,  I’m  telling  you dad,’  Girlie  stood  her ground, ‘I don’t care what you think about my brother, your son, what you do to him is going to affect all of us.’ ‘When was  that  bastard  here?’  Norm  demanded,  glaring  into Girlie’s  face  to  force  her  to  answer.  It  was  this  stubborn  one  who stuck up the most for her no good brother. Girlie shrugged  her  shoulders,  and  he  looked  around  at  the others with blank faces, and saw that they were looking at Girlie for an answer as well. Before he could say another word, the Constable welcomed himself into the kitchen. He had become a fat man in his years  at desperance  and  was  still  looking  for  a  woman  suitable enough  to  become  the  wife  of  a  country  policeman.  Yet  his heartstrings tugged for Girlie. ‘ Make yourself at home,’ Norm said, his eyes glaring at what his  language  called  the waydbala  jarrbikala ,  whom  he  had  never welcomed into his home. ‘Sorry,  old  man,  but  I  did  call  out,’  Truthful  replied,  giving Girlie a sweet smile. Girlie did not even look up, while her sisters went out of their way to make him welcome. There was a rush around the kitchen as  the  two  bigger  women  hurried  to  make  a  fresh  pot  of  tea,  to heat  the  food,  to  clean  the  table,  wash  up,  make  a  proper  place for  the  Constable  to  sit  down.  Sometimes,  Girlie  thought,  they would  do  anything  so  as  not  to  talk  to  outside  people.  Norm and  Girlie  remained  in  their  chairs,  unresponsive  to  Truthful’s pleasant  chatter.  Neither  had  a  thing  to  say,  leaving  Patsy  and Janice replying – ‘Hah! Hah!’ or ‘Nope.’ After a couple of minutes the room fell into silence. ‘Quite a bonfire you got there outside,’ Truthful finally said. ‘If you say so,’ Norm replied. ‘Had  a couple of phone calls, people complaining about the smoke,  that  kind  of  thing.  So  I  thought  I’d  better  come  by  and check it out.’ ‘We  lit  the  fire  to  burn  rubbish,  so  what  if  the  wind  started blowing  the  wrong  way,  that  is  what  the  wind  was  doing  around here for thousands of years before desperance ever existed.’ ‘Well! Love, I was just doing what I have to do, you know what some of those people are like,’ Truthful never liked getting off on the wrong foot with Girlie. ‘ Then you go back and tell them what I told you as soon as you finish that cup of tea, okay?’ Janice went  and  stood  at  the  kitchen  door  with  her  back  to everything. She lit the first of many cigarettes she would smoke for the day. She watched the smoke still heading towards town but she sensed the change was coming anyway. ‘You can take your time honey,’ Patsy cooed at Truthful’s hurt face.  She  thought  Girlie  should  consider  her  lucky  stars,  the  cow that  she  was.  She  gave  Girlie  a  mean  look  every  time  she  stood behind his back, bending her body in so that her breasts touched his shoulders, while she topped up his teacup. Girlie looked back in  mock  exasperation.  She  felt  like  wiggling  her  own  tits  at  Patsy but decided against the idea, as it might give the pig something to get  excited  about.  She  had  always  thought  those  two  fools  were meant for each other, if only they could see it. ‘Gee, Patsy  looks  after  you,’  she  said  with  a  tightness  in  her voice to Truthful who was watching her every move, while she was just  short  of  stopping  herself  saying,  or  haven’t  you  noticed,  you overweight lump of shit. Truthful  responded  with  a  smile  which  reminded  Girlie  of  a crease in a turnip. He knew better than to get into a debate about anything  with  Girlie  in  front  of  the  family.  She  was  at  it  again, trying to palm him off with Patsy as if he was hard up for a woman. He  knew  ways  of  making  Girlie  scream  for  being  mean  to  him. Well! She knew what she was asking for, he thought, if it was pain she wanted. Norm stared  at  Truthful,  while  the  room  bristled  with  long unresolved tensions about dead bodies, finding someone to blame, how  to  classify  the  terms  of  victimisation,  trashed  homes  and ramshackle  bodies  recovering  from  sexual  abusers  who  wallowed with joy, like they were opening presents on Christmas day. each of the daughters recognised the body language. Norm was sitting at the table, rigid, like one of his stuffed mullets. They raised eyebrows at each other – he was brewing again. Truthful was chewing gum. Girlie looked at the clock on the wall and knew it was just a matter of minutes before the explosion would hit the room. They had seen it all before. First, he would slam his fist on the table, offer to give Truthful a full fist in the eye, abuse all of them, especially Girlie,  whom  he  called  the  fornicator  with  no  shame  who  slept around with a cop, and what have you. She would instantly react with  a  raucous  laugh,  and  say : ‘Can’t  you  say  slut  because  that’s what you mean isn’t it? And that’s what the whole world calls a slut around here.’ She had already anticipated what he would do next – let the cat out of the bag about elias, whose body was still in the yard. Norm would follow up by offering to challenge Truthful out the back. What suitable means of blackmail would it be this time? Acceptance into the family by endorsing the big ugly prick who was fucking his daughter? It never worked. Girlie knew the cop’s job and  Truthful  was  the  full  box  and  dice.  He  would  do  his  job, questioning and questioning until Norm became that rotten mad he would drag Will into the firing line, or all of them even. Janice  was  still  standing  at  the  doorway  staring  at  the smouldering fire, looking at elias’s body through the black smoke, and  anticipating  how  the  whole  town  would  once  again  become involved  in  the  private  lives  of  the  family,  when  the  anticipated smell of rain hit her in the face. She looked to where the rain was coming  from,  and  saw  a  windstorm  approaching  from  the  south behind a wall of red dust. ‘ rain ’s coming,’ she said, throwing the cigarette butt out in the yard. Turning back to the kitchen, her gaze met Girlie, and she said with her flat, matter-of-fact voice, ‘We better shut up.’ Janice had  given  the  signal  for  Girlie  who  looked  down  at Truthful, looked directly into his snake eyes, while reaching over to tap  the  table  with  her  hand  directly  in  front  of  him,  the  only indication she wanted to give him to follow her to her room. Since he  had  managed  to  worm  his  way  into  the  house,  she  knew  he would hang around until he got what he had come for. everyone in that kitchen knew he intended to stay the day, or night, or until he  had  got  Girlie  into  her  room.  In  the  many  months  Truthful had been coming over to the Phantom household, if Girlie tried to  ignore  him,  he  just  hung  around  the  place  for  hours  waiting until  she  gave  in  to  the  pressure  he  placed  on  all  of  them.  It would have been a different matter if the boys were around town. Their presence would have made him leave them all alone. But with Inso and donny working down at the mine, Truthful felt free to come around whenever he wanted, as though it was his job to look after the family. Girlie sneered at Janice and Patsy as Truthful  flirted  with  them  about  how  he  had  become  their  man about the house. Swaying between his lust and his ability to keep on his toes, even revelling with pride in having a close relationship with  such  a  capable  man,  he  never  forgot  Norm  was  his  prime murder suspect, and it was his job as a professional policeman to snoop around the locale. oh ! Yes! A man like Truthful thought it might be kosher to have his fun, but  he  knew  his  job.  He  would  solve  the  unresolved  crimes  in desperance  even  if  he  had  to  die  doing  it.  The  waiting  game offered  the  extra  bonus  for  Truthful’s  happy  calculations.  The handcuffs in his pocket pressing into his groin roused the sensation of  good  times  ahead.  He  could  almost  smell  the  lucky  break  in Girlie’s  perfume,  the  smells  of  her  body  mingling  with  his,  knew luck was just around the corner. All he had to do was fuck the sister, sweet talk the others, become a top fisherman. If ever the scoundrel of  the  town,  Will  Phantom,  became  homesick,  and  came  running home to daddy like the spineless cur he was, all the better. Girlie looked over at Janice. ‘ don’t worry about shutting up the windows,’ Janice said, ‘Me and Patsy will do it.’ 
Secrets…     Thousands  of  dry  balls  of  lemon-coloured  spinifex, uprooted by the storm, rolled into town and were swept out  to  sea.  From  the  termite  mounds  dotting  the  old country the dust storm gathered up untold swarms of flying ants dizzy with the smell of rain and sent them flying  with  the  wind. dead  birds  flew  past.  Animals racing in frightened droves were left behind in full flight, impaled on barbed-wire spikes along the boundary fences. In the sheddings of the earth’s waste, plastic shopping bags from the rubbish dump rose up like ghosts into the troposphere of red skies to be taken for a ride, far away. Way out above the ocean, the pollution of dust and wind-ripped pieces of plastic gathered, then dropped with the salty  humidity  and  sank  in  the  waters  far  below,  to  become  the unsightly decoration of a groper’s highway deep in the sea. Wild weather was happening all around Norm Phantom, as he rowed through the darkness, pushing with all his strength over the breakers of the tidal surge, taking his clever thoughts with him. His mind had a certain kind of craziness of not caring what happened to  him.  People  said  that,  but  people  were  wrong,  because  Norm Phantom was one of the most calculating men on earth, second to none when it came to self-preservation, who normally set out to sea under the cover of a storm.  Those big pretenders sitting in their long grass camps were not in  the  slightest  bit  astonished  when  he  told  them  that  those  who searched for his secret fishing places had failed. Lucky! Lucky thing! Too  Lucky! They  knew  the  names  of  the  old  white  people  in desperance who had sat around miserably for many wasted years, trying  to  translate  the  secret  conversations  Norm  had  with  the heavenly  spirits  at  night. They  will  never  know. Those  white  folk believed that if they could learn how to translate the voices of the stars,  their  sons  would  be  safe  at  sea  too.  They  would  become invincible,  like  Norm.  Their  boats  would  never  return  empty, bringing back fish from one end of the street to the other as in the heyday.  A  little  bit  of  luck  was  what  was  needed  for  the  town  to rejoice  in  fish  once  more.  The  old  people  respected desperance custodians because they felt sorry for them. The graveyard in the sea was full of their sons. everybody  knows  that  there  are  big  groper  in  the  Gulf  of Carpentaria, but those that joined Norm Phantom on his journeys were the ones nobody else had ever seen. Norm told the old people how  he  could  camouflage  himself  as  a  big  fish,  fooling  the  local pirates of desperance when he disappeared over the waves. The old people  said  he  must  have  sprayed  the  robbers  with  Mortein  fly spray, to divert them off of his tracks. it  was a very tricky thing to do ,  they claimed. When Truthful went with Girlie Norm had remained seated at the kitchen table brooding about the possibilities of life – if only he had his way. He mumbled something about how it felt as though a foul air had departed. ‘What did you say?’ He ordered his mute tongue to speak. He willed the words jammed in his throat to come out of his mouth, roll around the kitchen, roll down into Girlie’s bedroom. He  waited  for  the  words  to  break  through,  the  words  saying  he wanted to kill Truthful, to put his body parts into a bag and run off as  quick  as  he  could  to  feed  him  to  the  sharks,  and  that  was  the truth  of  the  matter.  He  waited  while  watching  his  daughters  run around the yard picking up what should not be blown away, closing windows and doors, preparing for the dust storm to hit. He could kill the cop, but the words stopped him from doing it. Patsy and Janice looked once or twice in the kitchen as they ran around the house. Both knew that if they were not living at home, their father would just sit there, while the wind blew its merry way through the house, taking the lot. He let the house go when they were not around to clean it. He let his daughters sleep with a cop. He  let  so  many  things  happen.  Norm  thought  they  could  think whatever they wanted, for it would be a sweet day if all of them got out of his house. The truth was, when Truthful had left the kitchen with Girlie, Norm was incapable of moving. He was immobilised in the  glue  of  his  own  blood,  pinning  him  like  a  dead  weight  to  his chair  where  he  wrestled  with  murder,  while  the  law  of  the  Ten Commandments held his body captive. Truthful had left the room mumbling something about reality . He  knew  the  father  played  his  part,  second  by  second,  with enormous intrigue and secrecy. He had watched Norm sit at the kitchen table, uninvolved, detached, immorally complicit, thinking he knew about cat-and-mouse games to outsmart a cop. Norm’s  thoughts  on  the  other  hand  had  been  running  in  a different direction, sifting through the pores of the many different storehouses in his mind. First was the obvious truth of resignation. He would let the white man get what he wanted; wasn’t it always the  way  with  Truthful,  growing  fat  with  his  own  greed,  getting whatever  he  could  to  gorge  himself  with?  Then,  two,  he  sought someone to tell him it was alright to kill a white man. Where was the  Fishman?  He  knew  Mozzie  was  in  town  but  he  still  had  not come over to see him. He had been half waiting for Mozzie since he  heard  his  cars  driving  around  town. even  now,  he  was  half expecting him to turn up. Mozzie knew how to get to the heart of the matter. He would tell him if he was right about what he felt he  should  do,  play  it  straight,  or  play  around  the  back.  Well! Why  doesn’t  he  come;  he  should  know  something’s  up,  Norm reasoned,  tapping  his  cup,  since  he  had  not  gone  in  search  of Mozzie  when  he  hit  town  like  he  normally  would.  Mozzie  should realise  something  was  wrong.  It  seemed  that  a  man  could  be lying  in  bed  half-dead,  waiting  for  someone  to  turn  up.  He  had forgotten that Mozzie never came to his place anymore. Norm thought elias’s body was most likely Will’s doing, since the  girls  would  have  been  correct  about  that.  Norm  knew  it  was not his imagination why the cop, watching like a hawk, was in the house.  He  recaptured  a  past  scene  in  the  kitchen,  seeing  Will’s fury  exploding,  kicking  his  way  out  of  the  house,  reversing  at breakneck  speed  back  down  the  road  he  had  just  arrived  from, and screeching to a halt in a ball of dust, to yell, ‘Watch the cop, man!’ Then, with not a moment to lose, foot dead on the gas – that was Will, and the last time he was ever seen around the traps. Will drove off, leaving the family staring at his dust trail. And somehow, maybe it was because there had been no chance to finish the  argument,  no  resolution,  no  reconciliation,  Norm  wanted  to help  the  cop  to  hunt  his  son  down.  Norm  knew  himself  to  be  a naive  man,  and  too  intoxicated  with  his  passion  for  the  sea  to abandon  it  at  Will’s  request.  He  believed  the  world  would  look after itself, infatuatedly, against the odds, because it always did and because  the  white  world  cared  little  about  people  like  Norm Phantom . Norm  still  pictured  him  packing  and  firing  his  words like bullets, ‘You are wrong, man. You want to take a reality check on  the  situation,  man.’  Norm  remembered  those  words,  very insulting,  new  words  around  these  parts.  He  frequently  had  a chance to think about what Will said, so much so he often used his son’s handful of words on others, to be impressive in an argument. This was what memories are made of. Things like Will’s blue ute, left on the outskirts of town heading south. The abandoned car was  still  there  like  an  ornament  on  the  roadside.  A  piece  of memorabilia,  dedicated  to  the  history  of  the  Phantom  family, which the father refused to tow home. The Fishman was in town but where was he? Words were like water  sweeping  by,  taking  the  memories  of  Will  away.  Well!  Will was never a proper son. Norm sneered at the oncoming storm; if Girlie  did  not  kill  the  cop  soon,  then  he  might  just  about  do  it himself. He pictured the two of them, he and Truthful, out at sea . ‘Would you want to go fishing tonight son?’ It could easily happen – an accident. He had taken Truthful out enough, though not far, never  too  far,  because  he  judged  a  man’s  seaworthiness,  what  he was  worth  out  there.  The  trips  inside  the  shallow  water  line,  not journeys,  were  far  enough  to  get  him  off  his  back  about  fishing, time enough to give Girlie a chance. He could have taken Truthful twelve hours out to sea to find the body of elias, and just as they both looked down in the water and saw the body lying on top of a shallow undersea ridge, it would be then that Truthful would stand up in the rocking boat to get a closer look, saying, ‘Where? Where? keep it steady,’ and these would be his last words before he fell, after he had leant too far over the side, just as Norm leant across to pull him back, the boat unbalanced on Truthful’s side, just as they  were  floating  on  top  of  the  groper’s  den. unfortunately, things happened too fast, the cop was drowning at sea, dropping quickly  into  the  depths  with  the  heavy  force  of  his  overweight body,  fully  clothed  in  uniform,  his  mouth  open  in  the  absolute shock  at  seeing  passing  pictures  of  himself  drowning.  Truthful would think someone else was holding a slide show of his death, click, clap , and Norm saw himself, many hours later, stricken with regret, apologising to Girlie. Norm had finally relented to the kind sea, and he was unable to reach down far enough into the water to bring Truthful back. He opened the kitchen door again to let in the fresh air of the dust storm, so he could look at the wind flying past. He was waiting for that tall, skinny man with the untidy rat-coloured hair to come along.  Gordie  had  inherited  the  tin  combat  hat  that  had  once belonged to the madman Nicoli Finn, before he was found belly up and picked at by every fish in the bay, way out in the low tide. The ladies of desperance said Nicoli died fighting like a soldier. The  few  witnesses  attending  the  annual  picnic  day  had  watched Finn in his final encounter, but said afterwards, even though they had talked about what they could do, and had even decided to take a closer look, they decided to keep walking along the beach kicking the seashells out of the way so as to appear as though they were not watching  his  birds . At  the  wake  they  said: he   was  pretty particular about  his  birds  you  know .  The  witnesses  said  Finn  was  fighting  the hawks which kept diving at him, diving out of an ordinary blue sky,  just  like  missiles.  Someone  remembered  remarking  at  the time while Finn was doing his work: This is what the war must have looked  like .  The  old  maidens  attending  the  picnic  could  only imagine what took place in a war, just as they wondered to which unfortunate battle in what corner of the globe their knitted socks and  blankets  for  the  national  war  effort  had  been  dispatched long ago. officially, he was doing his own business, and the maidens said they were not to get involved in someone else’s affairs, even if they should  have,  for  it  would  have  been  improper  to  interfere  in  a man’s work, and they had grown fearful that if they had interfered, they could have done nothing to prevent the attack, and what if the hawks started attacking them? Saving Finn was a job for the police, they remarked without offence. What was being asked of them was a job a decent wife would do if Finn had been sensible enough to acquire one. Well! He was dead now and useless to anyone.  After  Finn  died  and elias  left,  poor  Gordie  inherited  the mantle  of  neighbourhood  watch.  Gordie  was  magnificent.  You could watch him, always with a compass swinging around his neck, and a hammer in his hand, in case he had to tack down the net. If  he  did  not  have  these  things,  then  you  would  have  to  think something was wrong, something was out of order. Gordie forgot nothing.  He  was  good  at  his  job.  The  best.  When  he  became  the official watchman for the town he taught himself to walk fast, first by  running,  then  gradually  slowing  the  running  until  he  got  it down to a trot, and from a trot, to a fast walk. Had to. He had to circumnavigate the town every three hours come rain, storm or nothing. And be better than Finn, who had a background in surveillance. With the storm under way and Truthful ensconced out of sight in a tryst with Girlie, Norm waited for the moment Gordie would appear, striding his way across the horizon. He had seen him pass earlier in the night. The cloud cover was heavy, hiding the light of the moon, but the white dog had groaned in its sleep when it heard the  passerby  crackle  the  stubble  grass  underfoot.  More  intently, Norm watched again at midnight when the clouds had lifted and the moonlight shone like a torch. He watched for Gordie’s eyes on the prowl. once  he  saw  Gordie  was  heading  back  towards  town  again, marching  on  a  track  through  the  salty  marshes  near  the  beach, Norm listened for the startled sea birds squawking as he approached their nests. He quickly gathered his sea gear together. Matching the extraordinary quietness of the night bird in the blackness outside hopping  past  the  house,  he  moved  past  the  bedrooms  of  his sleeping family. Truthful snored peacefully. Norm paused outside Girlie’s  room  before  continuing  to  the  fishroom.  He  returned, carrying  his  fishing  tackle,  then  paused  once  more  to  see kevin, still sleeping. outside the house he picked up elias, and along with his gear and fishing tackle, swung the body over his shoulder. He moved off  towards  where  his  little  aluminium  boat  was  moored  in  the shallows,  where  the  murmuring  sea  with  its  incoming  tide  kissed the  shoreline.  An  owl  was  speaking  to  the  night.  These  were  the only sounds. With the thought of going on a long ocean trip after being on land so long, Norm felt light-headed, but he packed the boat and was ready to leave within minutes . ‘We’ll go together, just like old times,’ Norm told elias, as he pushed the boat further out on the water. repeatedly he told himself it was the right thing to do. He was not too old. He could still do the journey. He had taken elias to the gropers’ place in the middle of the sea  before,  and  had  been  surprised  that elias  already  knew  of  it. The  gropers  started  to  rise  in  the  water  all  around  the  boat, mingling  closer  and  closer  than  they  had  ever  done  in  all  of  the years Norm had gone on this pilgrimage. Norm had been sure that there was communication between the fish and elias. Then, he saw the  gentlest  expression  on elias’s  face  as  he  looked  up  from  the water. It was a child’s face, smiling at the look of Norm’s concern. elias turned back and slapped his hands under the water. Hundreds of the big gropers surged towards the boat, until in the  moment  when  they  looked  like  colliding,  the  fish  had  pulled away, creating a foaming sea in their wake as they sank back into the  depths  of  the  ocean.  Norm  had  often  thought  about  what happened that day. It was the memory which had come flooding back  to  him  as  he  sat  at  the  kitchen  table,  ready  to  destroy  the world around him. The memory fought off the devils until Norm saw  what elias  had  wanted. elias  had  come  back  to  tell  Norm  to take him home. Norm knew if he mapped the route well, he would reach this spirit  world,  where  the  congregations  of  the  great  gropers journeying  from  the  sky  to  the  sea  were  gathered.  The  gropers would  wait  for  Norm  before  they  moved  on,  far  away  under  the sea,  before  returning  to  the  sea  of  stars,  at  the  season’s  end.  He was still feeling annoyed about the girls burning the fish. The coral trout belonged to elias’s spirit and rightfully, they should accompany the dead man on this journey into the spirit world. Having to take elias away without his belongings did not prepare him well for this other world. He knew it was the wrong thing, if elias went without his fish. He cursed. The wind that had been ready waiting for him died and there was an incredible stillness. It had to be a sign, as though  the  wind  had  refused  to  take  them,  Norm  thought.  So there he was, standing out there in the water in the middle of the night, sweat running down his face, all that work for nothing. Norm trudged  barefoot  back  up  the  beach,  back  towards  the house  to  collect  the  old  fish.  He  felt  like  a  fanatic,  a  madman, searching for a precision that did not exist in his terrible obsession with fish. He realised he was out of time halfway up to the house, but  he  kept  going,  dodging  around  the  back  of  several  piles  of driftwood, almost crawling along on his belly so that Gordie would not detect his movements. He expected Gordie would turn up at any second, he could picture the long, lanky streak running almost, coming in to check. As he retraced his steps inside the house, he knew he now had only minutes to leave in order to follow the course he had charted for himself. He knew if he set sail any later, the seas would be giving the wrong signals, the tides would be wrong, he would not be able to recalibrate, and after that, whatever he did would bring him further askew. The white dog, happy he had returned, was following excitedly behind him. He thought he had disturbed kevin, but the lad was just talking in his sleep, talking to Will. Norm knew it would not be long before kevin was up and about. Truthful was still in a deep sleep  –  it  would  be  so  easy  to  smother  him.  He  reached  up  and pulled  down  about  six  of  the  silver  fish  and  four  coral  trout  that were hanging from the ceiling, and put them into the bags that had come with elias. Norm threw the bag of fish into the boat and pulled the boat out to deeper waters, just as he had watched elias do on the day he had set off, leaving desperance for good. The coolness of the water was refreshing on his skin after working in the humidity of the hot night. He set course by the star of the fishermen that was setting low  in  the  northern  horizon.  Then  he  climbed  on  board  and started rowing away as the cloud cover again returned blackness to the remaining night. A  steady rain fell while Norm rowed into the tide racing over the  seagrass  meadows  of  the  flat  sea. once  again,  his  thoughts turned to the Fishman not coming to see him. In the darkness, he felt elias’s presence, sitting at the end of the boat, looking at him, as he usually did on their way out fishing in the good old days. Before the kids grew up, before the madam of the house caused  her  trouble,  and  the  Fishman  came  and  went  as  he pleased. ‘ You remember that, elias?’ he said, speaking softly, as though the dead man had been listening to his thoughts. This had never happened before in the ups and downs of the in-between years. ‘Fishman  always  came  around,  didn’t  he elias?’  There  was  no answer, and Norm rowed, hissing his story in the rain, ‘ despite the  sheer  irresponsibility  of  it  all,  she  drove  off  with  him.’  He remembered  both  of  them,  Mozzie  and  Angel,  huddled  like  a couple of teenagers, in the huge expanse of the back seat of the main man’s flash car, driven by the membership. ‘ It  ended  for  me  on  the  day  she  ran  off  with  the  Fishman, elias,’  Norm  said  on  the  forward  lift  of  the  oars.  ‘28  January, 1988,’  swinging  the  oars  back.  ‘You  know  why  I  remember  it?’ Swoosh. ‘It was precisely four p.m.’ Swish. This was the time of day when he most vividly felt a loss of heart. ‘It was a hot, hot day to 238remember.’ The hot wind had been blowing it was true. He had circled the date in green on the calendar, and fourteen years later, the  same  calendar  with  the  Snowy  Mountains  stream  picture remained on the wall as a reminder to the family. ‘ No,  you  are  wrong,’ elias’s  deadpan  voice  came  back through the night, the way he usually spoke to Norm while they were fishing, back to back to each other, waiting for a bite. elias had never budged from his belief that it was a different day. The 27th day in January 1988. It was ten a.m. A hot bugger of a day. Angel  was  walking,  her  shift  made  of  some  fine  material,  he  did not  know  what,  clinging  against  the  front  of  her  body  as  she walked in the hot air. The wind was that hot it made your blood boil. Piles of rubbish at the tip had combusted into roaring fires. People were fainting in their houses in the middle of the morning. oxygen was draining from the atmosphere. everyone was perishing for rain. There were people who were too breathless to speak, but Angel had spoken to him. She said in her dismissive, flat voice, in her usual manner of speaking to the likes  of elias,  men  who  did  not  stir  her  feelings  in  the  right  way, that Norm was already down looking at the boats. elias had argued that  he  too,  would  always  remember  that  day  because  he  had marked it on his own calendar. It had a picture of two galahs sitting on  a  perch,  screeching  at  each  other.  He  had  kept  the  picture because  it  reminded  him  of  the  occasion.  Norm  remembered seeing her thin frame of a body in that dress, walking in the mist along  the  track  through  the  wastelands,  heading  towards  the rubbish dump. He refused to believe elias. He argued vehemently that in January of that year, high tide was at precisely four p.m. in the afternoon, the same as the day Angel left, so this was why elias had to be mistaken. The argument lasted for days on the sea. This was fishing with elias. He rowed on. devoid of blue, a strangely coloured creature was man, the intruder, who ventured at his own risk into these faraway, watery domains of the ocean… It was a long journey Norm Phantom had set upon into a world that by day belonged to the luminescence of the ocean and above, to  the  open  skies,  and  by  night,  to  the  spirits  who  had  always haunted  this  world.  They  say  this  faraway  place  belonged  to  the untamed spirits of fishes, women and sea creatures. This was the realm of mischievous winds and other kinds of haughty souls from above. Who goes there? the quiet wind asked. The following wind answered.  It  said  there  came  a  man  of  pain  and  another,  who looked disinterestedly at the world as though it did not exist. The  sea  wind  following  Norm  along  in  his  little  boat  was  a spirit  of  intemperate  disposition,  who  woefully  blew  little  gusty breezes for days and passed through the night playing nocturnes that droned over the waves, or else, left, running away from the toiling seafarer in its wantonness, searching for a wild idea on the other  side  of  the  world. on   those  days  of  hot  calm,  the  air  was heavy  with  a  humid  clamminess  that  drove  Norm  half  crazy. everything on the boat felt damp. As he rowed on, looking back at elias  all  day  long,  he  started  to  detect  a  grey  mould  growing over the dead man’s face. With no escape from the sight of elias’s face, he watched for the spread of new patches of mould advancing over his friend’s body. At night he slept, half curled up in the cramped space in the middle of the boat in a puddle of stagnant water. Although his body felt  sluggish  in  the  heavy  air,  his  mind  was  as  attuned  as  a  wary night bird passing his boat. even the slightest movement of water breaking with a fish surfacing would awaken him in fright. ‘What’s that! What’s that!’ he called out, half asleep, ready to abandon ship. And  from  the  other  end  of  the  boat  in  the  darkness, elias  said calmly, ‘  relax, go back to sleep, it’s nothing.’ unfortunately, once robbed  of  his  sleep,  he  could  not  sleep.  Instead,  driven  with annoyance, grumbling that it was alright for lias to be calm – he did not have to come back alive – Norm would start rowing again in  the  middle  of  the  night,  navigating  by  his  memorised  map, following the star of the fish. He would row into daylight, his mind absorbed with directing his monotonous labour, until a startled cry from a seagull winging close  to  his  head,  ricocheting  off  every  surface  of  the  sea  plain, echoed like madness through his mind. elias’s  version  of  the  argument,  which  altered  and  swayed  in many  different  directions  over  the  years,  was  based  on  seeing Angel day walking to the rubbish dump in the summertime. elias said  he  was  not  blind,  he  knew  what  he  saw.  All  the  Pricklebush people living on the edge of town were sloshing around like wild pigs  in  ankle-deep  mud  to  get  anywhere  all  along  the  roads  in town, after the heavy Wet season rain. The world was no longer under the spell of the monochrome grey-coloured dry  season.  The  land  was  covered  with  flood plains  alive  with  frogs  calling  to  each  other  in  waves  of  sound running across the atmosphere, closing to absolute silence near to the magical footsteps of elias, before resuming the pitch of the highest decibels behind him again. Next, elias used the brighter paints on his palette to portray the scenario, describing how he had watched her moving in the mist and long grass like an angel, a spirit no less, along the path, skipping to avoid the puddles. elias was not taunting Norm. He spoke frankly without any realisation that the truth of the lost wife was  painful  for  his  friend.  The  way elias  spoke  about  Angel astonished him because his wife had never been angelic. The  way elias  spoke  of  what  he  saw  was  no  secret,  not something he had seen alone, because everyone in the Pricklebush felt haunted whenever she approached them, like a hummingbird, in the bush, along lonely paths on the outskirts of the town. She was  the  one  who  made  people  scratch  their  heads  and  say, ‘What  kind  of  woman  was  that?’  To  many  others,  she  was  a memorable,  marvellous  sort  of  woman  who  printed  herself  on your  mind  with  red  lipstick,  while  you  watched. elias  said  she was too good for sure. He had stood by the side of the track like a stupid man, he said. ‘Hello elias,  Norm  is  already  down  at  the  boats,’  she  purred catlike  at elias  gawking  at  her  again,  then  rolled  those  luxuriant brown eyes, and just like the queen she was, she floated off. Norm paused at the call of a seagull. His mind floated back to the  thoughts  that  had  preoccupied  him  in  those  days.  All  of  the many  preparations  he  was  engrossed  with,  even  for  such  a  small sea  craft.  The  inconsequential  trappings  to  ensure  survival. elias never  worried  come  rain  or  storm,  while  Norm  was  forever moving about with his all-weather jacket over his head for shade, checking  equipment  from  one  end  of  the  boat  to  the  other, fanaticising over hairline cracks becoming gaping holes overnight. ‘You never used to be like that, fret, fret. I reckon you live in the ruins of married life.’ Those were elias’s true words about his good friend Norm. Norm threw elias’s words back now as an accusation, ‘How come you were saying things like that about me?’ elias looked him  back  squarely  in  the  eyes  and  kept  on  staring,  until  Norm answered for him, ‘Why didn’t you ask me that when I was alive?’ Norm mumbled he would have, but he did not want to cause an argument, so, ‘It did not matter.’ unable to continue this argument with itself, his mind slipped back to the days of golden yellow, and boats of capillary red, when a man walked home when he felt tired. Norm moved  awkwardly,  his  legs  severely  cramped  from  the long journey, and checked the four fishing lines hanging over the side  of  the  boat.  He  changed  the  bait  with  pieces  of  flesh  from  a small shark he had been saving from his catch from the previous night.  ‘See!’  He  showed  the  lines  to elias  before  throwing  them over  the  sides  again.  Looking  into  the  spot  where  the  lines  were sinking into the blue-green depths, he saw his companion following, the manta ray with its greying form moving through the depths of ocean below. Norm became intoxicated by watching the prolonged movement  of  the  suspended  ray.  The  creature  moved  so tantalisingly  slowly  by  suspending  itself  in  the  drift  of  tidal movement.  He  no  longer  cared  to  stay  above.  His  vision  slipped into and out of the waters, breaking the surface so many times, he became lost in time.  The grey sea creature willowing below carried his subliminal mind on its back, absorbing those captured thoughts of Angel day walking  out  of  a  submerged  track  in  the  sea  towards  him.  She walked out of the water not far from the boat in a dazzling ray of sunlight, and she walked away, back on the track that led to the rubbish dump. Norm gripped the vision, staring straight through reality to watch her for the first time that long-ago day when elias had seen her. Looking so closely into her face, he was astounded at  its  clarity.  He  was  shocked  to  see  a  secret  intimacy  residing within her. He had never before seen this face from her childhood transcending  through  the  travesties  of  their  life  together.  He thought  he  had  never  seen  her  before.  She  walked  with  a tranquillity and a beauty that was her normal face, but which she had  carefully  folded  up  and  stored  away,  saved  only  now  for stolen  occasions  of  when  she  was  completely  alone.  He  felt ashamed to be hiding behind the long grass, peering out with the grasshoppers, slipping along behind her, following on the path of what  happened  on  that  very  last  day  he  and elias  had  cast  the peaceful spells of being just simple men working on their boats. It  had  been  a  very  ordinary  day  of  whiling  away  the  time  when suddenly  the  blue  nylon  line  ran  straight  across  the  water,  and Norm Phantom was propelled out of his daydreams. He was being challenged by a fish of great strength that held the end of the line taut after it plunged into the depths, as though it had turned itself into a rock. The strange object in the distant sea line that he had been watching still edged its way through the water, slowly bobbing like a balloon, moving against the slight breeze blowing across the sea from the mainland. Norm scanned the surface, vigilant, yet far too  preoccupied  now  with  the  sun  hanging  low  in  the  sky,  as  he struggled with his first catch in what had become a long day. The war raged on for what seemed like hours between the old man weakened in his travels, and the fish, the long, narrow, silver body of a giant Spanish mackerel, spinning through the water with one  of  Norm  Phantom’s  lines  hooked  into  its  mouth.  The  fish sprang out of the water, twisted in the air to eye Norm with the hateful vengeance caught fish have of men, and ran the line flat chat – twang, twang, back and forth, from one side to another, cutting  through  the  thousands  of  little  bait  fish  that  regularly swam in the shade underneath the boat, and like a great trickster, twisting the half-dozen spare lines into a single knot. Afterwards,  success  was  not  great.  The  perverse  deep-rooted sea man’s euphoria did not etch deep in his bones. Instead, he felt humiliation wash over his skin, exposing him as a marauder of the sea,  a  stranger  in  a  strange  place.  He  felt  vulnerable  in  his  little boat. Self consciously, he used his knife in a butchering act to gut the fish, then he noticed the strange shape of a giant stingray, as big as the boat itself, flying across the sea like a passenger of the wind. The sun sitting low on the horizon threw its bright rays across the  water  which  simulated  liquid  gold.  The  tantalising phenomenon moving towards Norm reflected a blinding light, as its  ploy  to  distract  his  scrutiny,  while  it  scrutinised  him  with predatory eyes. Several times Norm was forced to avert his own eyes to the safety of the sun-glistening waters, or more guardedly, to the shining silver of fish blood swimming around his feet. Yet, drawn  back  time  and  again,  he  would  lift  his  eyes  above  the shield  of  his  tiny  world  on  the  vastness  of  water  to  capture another glimpse of the giant creature’s hypnotic power. drowning in  his  distractions,  Norm  suddenly  looked  across  at elias  as  if remembering he was not alone after all, and saw the dead man smiling at him. ‘If you are in charge of our little journey elias, you better start telling me what we are going to do now,’ Norm said, relinquishing control, no longer sure if he ever had control. He ate some of the raw fish flesh, staring around like an animal, waiting  for  another  animal  to  eventuate,  to  steal  his  food.  He heard fingers clicking. He looked around and there was nothing. But it was enough. He found what he had mislaid. He saw the route  of  their  journey  laid  out  in  his  mind,  from  woe  to  finish line, and knew he was again on track. ‘ right! right! right! So if this is the case…’ Norm spoke softly this  time  to elias,  without  ending  his  speech,  as  if elias  was  also studying the same map he was looking at. He must never question his vulnerability to the elements of the weather again. He looked across the sea, this time he could see wind and storms held in the arms  of  the  saltwater  spirits,  which  had  always  been  there,  all through this journey to the graveyard of the men of the sea. He  now  understood  the  travelling  phenomenon  he  had watched  was  the  sorrowful  woman,  a  cursed  spirit  of  death  who had come to find them. ‘Can you hear her elias?’ That night, he was convinced he could hear her cries in the wind whistling across the waters, that her cries were curses in a language that was foreign to him. He knew what the old people said about her. In the long grass  they  would  hear  her  wails  coming  in  from  the  sea,  or  even from land along the beach, if they listened closely at night. The old people said if you could hear her way out at sea, she was warning those  who  heard  her  to  stay  away.  No  fisherman  would  ever actually see her because she would make herself moonba  to them, yet  Norm  knew  what  he  was  looking  for.  He  had  an  image  of  a white flowing hair witch, whose very skin he knew was like slime, and off her body trailed seaweed for clothes. Men such as Norm Phantom kept a library chock-a-block full of stories  of  the  old  country  stored  in  their  heads.  Their  lives  were lived out by trading stories for other stories. They called it decorum  –  the  good  information,  intelligence,  etiquette  of  the  what  to  do, how to behave for knowing how to live like a proper human being, alongside  spirits  for  neighbours  in  dreams.  In  the  local  stories handed down through the generations, the sea woman was a death angel.  She  appeared  from  nowhere  in  her  endless  search  to take men back to her dark, empty world in the deep waters at the bottom  of  the  ocean.  Norm  knew  what  this  world  looked  like because he saw it in his dreams. on the floor of all oceans was a world overgrown with a forest of living black coral. It was a place that harboured a final darkness, where light never penetrated, and where men who were captured through some form of bewitchment, lived for the rest of eternity, pulled  and  tugged,  while  suspended  in  the  streams  of  water running  back  and  forth  across  the  globe.  The  old  people  always spoke  of  this  limbo  world,  where  fish  never  seen  by  man  were really  spirit  women  who  lived  and  swam  through  holes  in  the captured man’s ribcage, and perpetually fiddled with his brain to make him forever yearn to be rescued. Another little wind blew an old green rubbish bag into the boat. Norm guessed it must have flown hundreds of kilometres, whirling its way across the water from desperance’s dump. Believing it to be a  second  omen,  a  curse  from  someone  in desperance,  someone from the Pricklebush mob on the other side, he kicked the tattered plastic overboard in the darkness, as though it was something alive, a Goddess woman who came flying low across the sea. When it blew straight back into his face, he read the change as a sign telling him that  there  were  wild  winds  beginning  to  pour  back  into  the  Gulf from the north-east, bringing more storms. Norm carefully watched the green form spiralling around the boat, once, twice, each time as if it wanted to land and attach itself to him. With his arms flailing aimlessly at the plastic thing in the night, he told her straight: ‘ don’t you come here.’ oh! Yes! What a thing. He was convinced this was a sorceress of a wife. A witch who had borne his children and then behold, in front of his very eyes, walked off, wilfully wrecking their marriage. He heard her rustling as she hovered between them, whispering secrets to elias – ‘Norm’s lost at sea.’ Then the wind turned, and she flew back with it towards the coast. With her departure, Norm felt a heavy shadow passing over  him.  It  was  the  change  coming,  and  he  told elias  in  a  low, steady  voice  to  get  ready.  ‘Make  out  nothing’s  happening.  Brace yourself man.’ The sea remained as flat as a tack but Norm waited. The  wind  did  not  turn  into  a  storm  and  the  boat  sat  in  the  flat, humid sea with Norm, sticky and hot, returning to the last dying days of his marriage. So far, the journey had taken Norm more than two weeks of rowing all day long, living on raw fish, and drinking rain water he collected on a sheet of plastic made into a hollow dam. He stored the  water  he  captured  in  soft-drink  bottles.  Then,  knowing  the place  where  the  gropers  lived  was  drawing  closer,  he  stopped worrying  up  the  storms  as  he  journeyed  through  the  humidity and  flat  seas,  realising  that  all  these  obsessions  of  what  was  not right, were metaphors for his failed marriage. one clear morning, Norm knew he had reached his destination, when  he  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  groper  swimming  with  his  huge back fin clear of the water, no further than twenty metres away. He  waited,  watching  while  it  swam  over  to  the  side  of  the  boat. once, elias had told him that the groper was the descendant of the  giant  dinosaur.  Norm  did  not  know  whether  it  was  true  or not.  He  had  other  stories.  Their  whole  area  was  covered  with megafauna  once  upon  a  time, elias  said.  This  he  explained  was millions of years ago, before it stopped raining, and the claypans were covered with rainforest. elias explained that when you went around parts of the country thinking you were walking on rock, it  was  really  fossilised  tree  stumps  from  those  times.  The  rainforest trees were massive, he said. It was hard to imagine. Norm saw both these worlds wherever he looked at one. elias  said  it  was  not  hard  to  imagine  at  all,  for  he  had  seen such trees somewhere, but he could not remember the places he had  travelled.  Norm  knew  there  were  fossilised  bones  of  the ancestors  of  gropers  and  other  animals  being  found  by  the palaeontologists and flown by helicopter out of the country by the bag load. These old bones which had lain with the ancestors for millions  of  years,  were  being  stuck  together  again  with  araldite and wire, and covered with fur so all Australians could visit them in museums to see what these creatures used to look like. The Fishman was full bottle about the palaeontologists, so he came along too, saying to Norm it was only natural for elias to say those things, for the groper was a creature that used to have legs for walking on land, but it returned to the water to live sometime millions  of  years  ago  after  a  drought.  ‘We  are  having  the  same drought  right  now,’  he  said,  sniffing  the  air  for  temperature. Norm and the Fishman had once watched a groper die. Fishman patted the dry skin of the creature, and called it the giant Queensland  groper, Promicrops  lanceolatus .  Norm  was  amused  with  the Fishman’s knowledge of science. Fishman smiled, and said maybe it weighed nearly a ton, and joked, ‘All that scientify stuff is easy. You could learn it in a day.’ Norm knew the Fishman picked up everything  he  knew,  foreign  languages,  cooking,  taste  in  music, just  from  listening  to  the  broadband  radio.  He  declared,  ‘The radio has been my education.’ The creature had lain on the beach motionless. Norm looked at  the  tyre  marks  of  a  Toyota  four-wheel  drive  vehicle.  It  had winched the animal out of the water and up onto the beach. They had sat down on the beach beside the animal. Perhaps they were waiting for it to die by keeping it company. Well! he just goes on looking at you. He just goes on breathing and breathing through his lungs, pumping steadily, waiting. Its body had dark mottlings of brown and grey, which slowly, over time,  dried  out.  The  animal  took  on  the  appearance  of  being coated with thick armour, with its hard little eyes on either side of  its  broad  head,  still  staring.  ‘I  can  feel  him  staring  right through  me,’  Fishman  said  at  the  time.  The  white  fishermen from the mine were hacking the flesh off the body of the groper with an axe. ‘He takes a long time to die.’ Meanwhile, they heard the  animal  grunt  with  the  torture  of  each  blow  until  its  heart, buried deep inside its massive fleshy body, caved in to its long, agonising  death.  Norm  knew  other  stories  about  the  groper coming  from  the dreamtime  and  continuing  its  story  along  the tracks in the sea which he had followed for elias. And other kinds of stories about bad luck. The old people would say never go to sea with a fisherman who had killed a groper. everybody will tell you that. Better to let the groper  live,  or  his  ghost  will  live  in  the  dreams  of  the  fishermen who killed him, and when they go to sea, he will know what is in their heads, but he knows more about the sea than any fisherman, so he will be able to steal their luck away. This was the only way the spirit of such a colossal fish would ever go back to the sea. The groper hole was in an abyss, an ancient reef crater of a sea palace,  a  circular  fish  city  full  of  underground  caves  where  the huge fish liked to live. A place where they could have returned to from the land in ancient times like the palaeontologists say, or skies if  they  flew  like  the  elders  say  in  the  Law  of  the dreamtime. Millions  of  years  ago,  what  was  it  like? remember!  Were  skies blue then? once before, elias had brought Norm to the ocean’s pavonazzo  which shone from the depths to the surface with the colours of a peacock’s tail. It was where the gropers had lived for centuries and even  though  they  swam  together,  lived  solitary  lives  in  their  own separate caves. The  groper  caressing  the  side  of  the  boat  was  instantly recognised by Norm as one of his friends who swam right up to his beach in the night, calling him to go fishing with them. ‘Well! I’ll  be  darned,’  Norm  said,  awestruck  perhaps,  that  he  would actually reach his destination. He began whistling Auld Lang Syne  of  all  things  to  the  creature  who  had  once  been  his  groper’s friend. elias had become misguided like a fool into the politics of up town. He was far too busy to go fishing, too busy for the sea. He  abandoned  the  lot,  everything  he  knew,  just  for up town. Then it was just Norm, instead of elias, who set off following the gropers  along  their  sea  tracks  until  they  were  out  on  the  reefs. There,  they  would  leave  him  behind  while  they  herded  up  the reef fish, holding them in a tight circle around his boat, allowing Norm to spear as many as he wanted before releasing their hold. There were  other  times  on  strong  moonlit  nights,  when  the giant  fish  swimming  in  packs  would  lead  Norm  up  the  river estuaries  of  yellow  waters  with  the  tide,  to  show  him  something special, places anyone would want to see, where the prawns were running in their millions. Ahead, the gropers swam in a semi-circle formation, trapping the prawns in snags of dead trees piled up by  floods  near  the  riverbank.  These  big  fish  living  in  schools  of several  dozens,  contentedly  stayed  around  Norm,  then,  without any visible sign, they would leave for the sea. Norm watched them swimming off quickly, knowing it was time for them to follow sea tracks which did not belong to him. relieved that he had not set out on an aimless journey, Norm followed the giant fish guiding him, steering him along a corridor above  a  steep  underwater  canyon. during  this  last  phase  of  the journey, he had rowed most of the night, knowing he was nearly on top of the abyss where the fish lived, and the place from where they left to go on their spiritual journeys into the skies. Now he knew this was real again. He  noticed  a  different  breaking  pattern  in  the  current  line and when he touched the water, felt its temperature had risen. He  thought  he  saw  glimpses  of  the  giant  spirits  as  they  clung, swimming  closely  to  the  sides  of  the  underwater  chasm.  He imagined them looking up to the spirits of dead people twinkling as  stars  in  the  night  ocean  of  the  skies.  While  looking  straight past elias, he saw where the green-coloured water of the sea was beginning to swell as though there was something huge moving under  the  surface,  forcing  the  water  to  surge  up  over  the underwater reefs. Then, still many hundreds of metres away, he saw the sun spreading and hovering over the swell, the flashing, lit  wings  of  all  of  the  sea  birds. orienting  his  eye  through  the glare,  he  saw  the  birds  diving  into  giant  schools  of  sardine  fish and returning to the sky. More gropers  appeared,  following  the  side  of  the  boat;  their fins cut through the water and in their wake, they left small trails of  swirling  water.  Many  of  the  sea  birds,  after  noticing  a  place  to rest from their hovering in the hot breeze, flew in to land on any available  surface  on  the  boat.  They  assembled  in  large  numbers, squabbling  over  space,  forcing  Norm  to  brush  them  off  as  fast  as they  would  land.  Norm  was  overjoyed.  He  swept  the  birds  away with  his  hands,  while  still  trying  to  row  to  keep  up  with  the gropers, happily telling elias he had found the right place. ‘So,  here we are old friend. Here we are and we actually made it. I brought you home.’ Norm gradually stopped rowing, contented to look on, while the  sea  swelled  into  life  with  the  assembling  gropers  ploughing together through the water, vying for space next to the boat. He thought how remarkable the big fish were as they swam to join in  with  other  groups,  until  many  hundreds  were  clustering. Strangely, it reminded him of the Pricklebush families gathering at funerals. even though the day was growing hotter and stiller with humidity, it did not lessen Norm’s exuberance. He felt joy flooding  from  his  heart.  He  swooshed  away  the  white  seagulls hovering between him and elias and cried out, so far from land, ‘This is paradise.’ The birds lifted themselves up from the water and floated through the hot thermals like angels high up in the skies where the night meets the Milky Way. What say, he thought, considering  he  too  could  possibly  fly.  If  he  went  back  to desperance or not, it did not matter, for in this place, he felt alive again.  He  had  brought elias’s  spirit  to  his  final  resting  place while discovering man could do almost anything if it was meant to be. even knowing he was an old man in reality, he could go to sea again and again, if he could still read the signs. The fish completely surrounded the little tin boat, and it was any wonder to Norm that they did not bump into it. Initially, citing Acts  of  Contrition,  and  other  prayers  for  the  Stations  of  the Cross, Norm anticipated hell instead of heaven, after the moment where  the  weight  of  the  milling  fish  would  collide  into  and capsize the boat. The fish nudged the back of the boat through the water while Norm sat and watched, looking sadly at elias, in the  knowledge  they  would  soon  be  parted  forever.  Finally,  the fish moved away, creating a circle of clear water around the boat. Norm waited for several minutes, not sure of what to do next or what  would  happen.  The  fish  did  not  move,  and  even  while delaying the inevitable, he knew that he had to let elias go. ‘ So, it’s time old mate,’ Norm said, as he balanced himself in front of elias to untie the ropes holding him in place. during his journey, Norm had become quite nimble as he moved around the small  vessel,  as  though  he  had  always  possessed  a  corklike buoyancy  with  the  movement  of  water.  ‘It’s  time  for  you  to  go home.’ He remembered the coral trout and undid the lid of one of several  plastic  containers  kept  behind  the  ends  of  their  seats  for storage.  The  fish  in  their  bags  were  emptied  from  the  container and Norm placed them in elias’s folded arms. Then he lifted his friend, knowing he had to let him go, but not wanting to either, because  once  he  did,  he  knew  he  would  be  alone.  Betrayed  by feelings of loneliness, and a sadness which was only half reserved for elias,  he  sat  holding  the  body.  He  could  feel elias’s  spirit resisting his hold. Very carefully and reluctantly, Norm lifted elias over  the  side  of  the  boat  and  placed  him  into  the  strangely  calm emerald  green  waters. elias  sank  deeper  and  deeper,  gently through the giant arms of water waiting at every depth to receive him,  until  finally,  Norm  could  see  him  no  more.  Then  he  knelt down  in  the  water  on  the  floor  of  his  little  boat,  and  prayed  for elias, and was thankful he had brought his spirit safely to his final resting place. In time, when he looked up again, he found himself alone. All the gropers had departed and the day was almost gone. An  unusually  early  darkness  fell  over  the  ocean  on  the  day  of Norm’s burying elias at sea… How quickly the day had passed, and how incredible it seemed that burying elias could have taken all day. Norm Phantom lay on the  bottom  of  his  boat  reflecting  on  all  that  had  happened.  He longed for sleep. It occurred to him that perhaps the day had not passed  quickly,  and  the  eery  half-light  was  actually  his  own  eyes failing to see clearly, after weeks of water-reflected glare. ‘ Have  you  thought  you  might  be  going  blind?’  he  asked himself, warning himself while staring upwards at the clouds, but too tired to care. He thought of the stingray’s efforts to send him blind  for  invading  its  territory.  It  had  made  him  its  prey. deliberately it had lingered within his vision throughout the day. Yes, deliberately making him stare into the glare, while it waited for the sun to fall low enough in the sky in an attempt to blind him by its reflection. Ho! Man overboard. Who? Where? You, you idiot who’s yelling out mad. Poor elias had called. don’t fall prey to the stingray. He knew he would have to be more careful if the stingray came again, or else no one would call Man overboard . No one would hear, not even himself. He would fall overboard, trying to chase after its smile. They say the devils sitting around at sea could swim through a fishing man’s mind like a virus, waiting for the perfect opportunity, in  which  very  carefully,  a  devil  switches  your  thoughts  for  his. Thinking  about  the  sea  could  turn  a  man  mad,  although  there were other things too that could change the look of the world, an old  man’s  eyesight  was  not  that  reliable.  He  would  be  flat  out seeing a dollar on the ground, Norm thought of himself crossly, for being old, looking at his white beard which ran through his fingers. Perhaps  he  would  not  make  the  journey  back  to desperance  this time. exhaustion crept over him, entered his blood, and he could feel its flow pulsing through his body like lead. He settled down for a long sleep. He was overcome by the emotion of the final farewell to his one trusted friend. He told himself he would rig up and set sail tomorrow. He was wrong. He should have set course home immediately and rowed away. Millions of small fish were journeying south under  neath his boat. Near and far, the waters rippled with moonlit silver  as  they  passed  by.  Norm  did  not  notice  this,  nor  their crowded  bodies  nudging  his  boat,  as  if  signalling  him  to  leave. He took no notice of the watery spirits in the distance to the northwest throwing themselves up from the sea as they warred with the warlords  of  the  skies.  He  should  have  left  straightaway  while  he thought of sleeping. I f he viewed the threatening skies or felt the fleeing fish, he refused  to  acknowledge  the  warnings.  His  whole  being  flowed away,  rolling  in  the  slight  south-east  swells  which  were  both familiar and lulling, while he slept. Through his exhausted mind rolled  an  incoherent  jumble  of  pictures,  of  guiding  stars,  sea currents  flowing  from  all  points  of  the  compass,  crossing  the route  of  the  sun.  He  grabbed  from  the  forest  of  stars,  selecting gliding currents from bundles of spears, and sun rays stacked for choosing  as  he  began  plotting,  jigsawing  bit  by  bit  to  form  an imaginary  nautical  map  for  the  journey  back  to desperance.  It was all he had to do, all it was going to take, and in the morning, or later on in the night, after sleep, he would be on his way. He  slept  fitfully,  forced  to  a  state  of  wakeful  consciousness sifting and sorting time, place and current. Sleep finally evaded him  because  his  mind  was  alive,  it  was  electrifying  inside  his head, where the sea kept dividing itself into greater and smaller horizontal  and  vertical  columns,  forming  tributaries  as  thick  as the matted hair of the universe, from where all manner of ocean currents  were  flowing,  full  to  the  brim  with  floodwaters.  As  he walked  in  this  place,  searching  for  an  escape  route,  streams  of water were running in every direction as though it was the history of his knowledge crisscrossing itself until it formed a watery spiderweb, a polygon structure tangled with all of the local currents he ever knew in his mind, all tracks leading home. Sleep finally arrived through a state of restlessness reminiscent of the meandering of an ant moving endlessly and abruptly, this way and that, through its world in the dirt. With each sharp clap of thunder he was drawn from dreams where he half expected to see elias  springing  up  from  the  depths  below,  as  he  imagined him  trying  to  force  his  way  through  the  water’s  surface  until  it tore  apart.  Norm  could  feel  his  heart  racing  as  he  watched  the desperate  face  of elias  continuing  his  struggle  to  come  back  to life, while he in turn gasped for air on elias’s behalf, and battled to keep his own head above the surface. Then, drawn to the sight of elias’s hands gripping the side of the boat while trying to haul himself dead and all over the side, Norm woke himself up, just to escape his nightmare. Peering into the moonlight he saw it had been nothing except large  fish,  a  queenfish,  a  jewfish,  a  snapper,  flying  through  the water  and  hitting  it  again  side  on  with  a  thud.  It  was  nothing compared to the sound the ghostly squawking seagulls made, and when  he  opened  his  eyes  more  fully,  there  they  were,  dozens gathered on every available space in his boat again, white wings lifting off with his slightest movement; and, white wings landing again, all of them, sitting there like angels staring at him. Norm  felt  pains  gathering  in  his  chest,  pushing  his  body  in on itself. Glory be to the Father  – he thought he was going to die, or else  what?  Already  dead  in  the  escort  of  angels?  A  beautiful prayer he liked, reaching the end – As it was in the beginning, is now  and  forever  shall  be ,  he  called  out  in  his  sleep,  only  to  be awakened again minutes later and again. The birds were ferocious and helped themselves, fighting like unscrupulous beggars at the full  larder,  gobbling  down  all  the  dried  strips  of  fish  from  the Spanish mackerel hanging over the sides of the boat. After a time he fell asleep again. He dreamt he watched the stars fall deeper through the water, where their light lit up the watery world  of  the  gropers’  palaces.  He  looked  down  into  the  depths, through the effects of water moving to and fro with the waves, until he  saw  the  abyss  that  descended  down  the  many  levels  of  a Mesozoic  bluff.  The  deep  hole  could  have  been  the  result  of  a dreamtime volcano, or a meteorite the size of a mountain, or a city that had sunk deep down into the earth. e very layer of this world was covered in sea gardens of coral, coloured  all  shades  of  red  and  pink,  and  glistening  green  sea vegetables,  amidst  olive  seagrass  fields  waving  in  folds  in  the currents. A fish lives far better off than a dry old blackfella from desperance, Norm Phantom considered, looking at this spectacle. He  saw  himself  walking  through  these  quivering  gardens, searching  for elias,  but  all  he  found  were  bluey-green  lobsters and  crayfish  mooching.  They  froze  like  little  statues  as  soon  as they  saw  him  approaching,  walking  how  a  fisherman  walks  – guarding  his  every  step,  and  singing  out  – Elias!  Elias!   Well!  It was none of their business. They were only crustaceans darting under  cover  in  his  wake,  exchanging  fright  for  flight,  escaping quickly, slipping back down into their burrows. A woken  by  the  scuttering  and  scurrying  of  small  creatures escaping with his dreams, he looked over the water and saw the big tank fish – gropers swimming together in congregations of fifty or more  like  dark  clouds  arriving  from  the  distance.  As  each  group moved upwards, they surfaced loudly in volumes of water, raising their  bodies  high  out  of  the  sea,  which  were  splashing  down  like waterfalls  behind  them.  The  creatures  did  not  stop  when  they reached  the  highest  level  they  could  before  falling  back  into  the sea. Norm wiped their salty spray from his face, as he studied them swimming through the ocean of air, to ascend into the sky world of the Milky Way. They became specks in the sky until they were so far away  in  the  distance,  they  became  a  cloudy  blur  in  the  celestial heavens of stars and spirits. Afterwards,  the  only  disturbance  they  left  behind  were  little eddies in the water that made the boat roll more frequently. Norm, drifting  in  and  out  of  sleep,  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  fish  become stars  shooting  back  in  the  skies,  and  finally,  the  night  caravan moving further and further away on its journey. He knew at once elias  was  up  there  with  them.  Gone  thank  goodness  in  another form than the old hunched-back dead man who would have gone off  to  heaven  carrying  the  basket  cases  of desperance  along  with him. elias was taking the journey back to his own country, or the place he wanted to call home. Norm was ecstatic with his generous vision of elias. He knew for the rest of his life he could stop looking out for him. He would no longer resemble a man. He would be like a  star.  A  man  like  a  star.  Fish  stars.  Numerous  reminiscences slipped by in Norm’s search for the sign which would distinguish e lias and make him clearly visible for all times. Nothing happened. The book had been closed on their friendship. So, by jingo this was it.  Nothing  left,  except  the  wretched  shell  left  behind  in  sun  and sea-salt worn-thin cotton clothes who wondered if he were a man. In the early morning, Norm woke to the startled cries of the seagulls. He pulled his jacket over his head to keep the light away from  his  face  and  lay  there  inert,  deciding  whether  he  felt exhausted from dreams, or from too little sleep. Above the harsh awakening, the vivid memory of the Groper exodus stayed clear in  his  mind,  until  the  deafening  racket  of  squawking  birds resounded  in  his  ears,  echoing  as  though  the  sound  was  being slapped back from distant hills. Peering  out  from  under  the  jacket,  he  was  shocked  to  see  an even bigger assembly of birds had gathered on the water and in the skies  since  yesterday.  As  far  as  his  eye  could  see,  more  and  more birds filled the skies. The surrounding sea had turned almost stark white with the huge flocks that had assembled on the waters, lolling to the slight rise and fall of the flowing waves. As he stood up and clapped  his  hands  the  birds  flew  off  his  boat,  but  instantly  came back. Then he understood and said, ‘ Kangolgi .’ It was the time when the migratory birds were coming back to the coastline of the Gulf, some travelling on to other parts of the country. Above the travelling birds he now saw the long morning glory  cloud  of  the  Wet  season  looming  over  his  boat.  Any  local knew  instantly  what  the  long  tubular  cloud  was.  Stretching  from the western to the eastern horizon so low in the sky, Norm thought it might touch him as it descended to the horizon of the sea. Now it  occurred  to  him  that  the  birds  were  travelling  along  a  special route  made  from  the  evaporation  left  by  the  heat  in  the  cooling atmosphere by the trail made by the big fish on their journeys into the sky world of summer. The cloud band would soon evaporate, but  would  return  again  and  again  in  the  morning,  until  the  air became saturated with the humidity of the gatherings of enormous storm clouds. Then when the heavy rains finally stopped and the waters became calmer the following year, the big fish would return, as was the natural cycle of things. A world without end, Amen … Whispering  prayers,  Norm  Phantom  awoke  at  dawn  on  his second morning at the gropers’ place to a seascape locked inside a heavy  mist.  The  birds  had  lifted  high  into  the  skies  and  were nowhere  in  sight  when  he  set  his  lines  for  fishing.  The  day  was good,  fine  weather,  and  Norm  had  decided  he  would  fish  first, replenish  what  the  birds  had  eaten,  before  he  left  on  the  long journey home. Phew! Behold! Valuable time failed to blemish a stubborn  man  who  decided  he  needed  fish  from  one  part  of  the ocean and no other. His mind was made up, and once the task of fishing was under way, lines dropped, there was really no stopping him. The journey back would just have to sit around and wait it out with the fishing, where time stood still. Norm Phantom’s time was a spectacular clock which rang the alarm once he caught enough: exactly ten lines bearing a large snapper each, more than enough to last a few days, after throwing a few back into the ocean, after hours of boring andante  breeze, then it would be time to go. It was a funny day because the mist, godamn it, did not lift, nor did  the  fish  bite.  Norm  sat  patiently  in  his  boat  rolling  with  the waves all day long and waited for a line to move. The oars idled, he lost track of time, the captain did not row away. on   the  third  day  there  was  still  no  sign  of  fish  and  scarce movement in the hunched figure of Norm, dispassionately waiting over  his  baited  lines  while  looking  off  into  the  misty  distance  of hidden wilderness. The sea now a divine limbo under a membrane of whiteness, undecided how to create a new day. Norm felt sure of the  movement  of  ocean  swells  underneath  the  boat,  still  rocking very  steady  in  his  map  of  the  rhythms  of  the  south-east  winds passing from the other side of the globe, while he kept a pinpoint image of his exact location. otherwise in the stillness and quiet, he looked  like  he  had  died;  no  fish  tugged  on  the  dead  lines.  No surface  waves  rose  for  the  absence  of  localised  winds.  He  saw nothing through the murky grey waters aswelling. obsessed with a single mission, he hissed through closed lips, ‘Give  me  the  bloody  schools  of  sardines.’  He  remained  adamant fish would come sooner or later; they had to for this was an ideal spot. He kept watching for the large predator fish herding the bait fish.  In  a  location  such  as  this,  they  become  locked  in  a  terminal corral, but where in the sea could they be? Not  one  fish  of  any  size,  large  or  small,  appeared  above  the surface under his hawk-eyed surveillance. There was a detectable sea  swell  changing  in  the  deep  water  currents  many  fathoms below, but Norm, the sea king of fishing in the Gulf, did not notice anything happening at all. He was deciding, if not how morose he felt,  whether  he  was  experiencing  the  loneliest  and  longest  day of his life. He cut his hair, hacking chunks off close to his skull, with the sharpened  edge  of  his  fish  gutting  knife.  Staring  down  into  the water, not noticing the fast moving current, he watched the long strands  of  his  hair,  then  his  whiskers,  fall  into  the  water,  and  the indeterminable pattern of their floating away. The sea, occupying his thoughts, reminded him of how life is always haunted by death. How off-guard had Norm Phantom been when the dark shadow of the sea lady engulfed him – nobody would ever know. The mist lifted rapidly, as though the grand curtain had been swiped  apart  by  a  magician  who  in  his  unexpected  performance, banished  the  broken  pieces  of  small  ethereal  clouds  off  into  the sea. With the horror and shock of her unexpected arrival, Norm flinched  at  the  wind  driving  him  in  his  shoulder  blades  with  the inhuman heaviness of two very strong hands. First, she pushed and kneaded, willing him to stand up , shaking the boat. Her in  visible touch she replaced with a bolt of static electricity which dipped his every movement into her stinging body. A crackling feminine wail ran around him, embracing him, coaxing compliance to her desires. There was no denying it, the voice of the wind was relaying her needs,  and  could  easily  have  been  deciphered,  even  by  the  silly old fool Nicoli Finn, if he had been alive to hear it. Norm did stand, still as a statue, and looked into the sea as she beckoned for him to leap . The fine sea birds have made an opening just for you , she hissed. Leap. each  time  she  repeated  the  word,  it  rang  like  the  echo chamber of an enthusiastic audience at a spectacular performance of the wizard magician, cheering on the faint-hearted volunteer to his act, Leap! Leap! Leap!  ‘But elias  has  gone,’  Norm  kept  repeating  to  the  sea  lady,  as though it was his duty to correct her. He stood in the rocking boat, steadying himself while he argued with her, half captured just by acknowledging  her  existence,  while  from  the  sensible  part  of  his mind slipped an ever fainter desire to go home. After so long alone talking to himself, he enjoyed the sound of a womanly voice. He of course longed to go with her to look for elias, already knowing if he found elias he would leave her, jilt her, leave her flat. He even saw  how  comfortable  he  would  look,  reliving  his  story,  how  he escaped the sea lady, back at home together with elias. But he still denied himself abandonment to her body. His wily stubbornness to fight  against  lust  was  exhausting. Stop  making  excuses ,  listening  to her hiss on uncontrollably. See those warriors coming! Look right and left!  This  is  their  fighting  ground!  Go  now!  Save  yourself!  Jump!   She made the sea heave. Heavens only know how he managed to keep standing in the rolling  boat,  but  his  body,  wavering  with  the  rolls  like  a  spring, somehow  maintained  balance,  while  every  last  bit  of  his  bodily strength planted his feet to the bottom of the boat. She shoved him roughly in the back again, before containing him in her embrace when he looked like falling, then changed tactics by whispering in his ear about the old wars of the families. She was high speed, like an  adding  machine  rattling  off  the  local  history  of  centuries  in minutes, exact time, precise location, whose boundary it really was, the reason why others thought it was theirs, then explaining again and again, by going back over time in endless forays, the mistakes of each battle. She knew too much. Naming the people involved, the pain and suffering  inflicted,  who  fell,  what  misunderstandings  lingered  on and  grew  again  like  cancer,  she  was  a  running  account  of  battles which had gone on for centuries. Minutes later she called him War Lord , and started naming his battles, showing him a celebration of his  life  in  pain ,   while  intertwining  the  speed  of  her  dictation  by whispering  the  way  out,  an  escape  from  the  same  family  wars continuing on and on and on. Go on now, come out of the way of the unhappy dead, be with me. Her tidings  were  bereft  of  glory.  Could  she  have  lied?  Norm tried  to  understand  the  barrage  of  her  verbosity  by  choosing  at random,  names  to  slot  into  rows  in  the  crossword  puzzle  of forgotten history. As the puzzle grew larger, forming new offshoots, she would jump in front, too smart like, trying to squeeze in her own  words,  but  Norm  knew  the  game  better  and  would  keep crossing her out with the right word. He understood perfectly that the winds were coming from two directions now – south-east and north-west, colliding in squalls, after the mists had long ago been blown apart. She continued trying to distract him by calling out the names of all the dead people he had ever known. She described the battles they were now waging with each other in the afterlife. He succumbed.  Her  knowledge  was  greater  than  his  own.  She  had condemned  him  as  a  person  of  ignorance.  She  had  crippled  his mind. defeated, he saw a new truth in himself. He was just an old sailor  of  such  lackadaisical  efficiency,  he  could  no  longer  see  the seasoned  helmsman.  In  truth,  he  was  dependant  on  a  captain  to navigate the way home, and in great peril of losing his life. More was  the  pity,  the  old  fishing  men  at desperance  would say,  to  find  a  fisherman  at  sea  acting  like  a  gambler  losing  the game,  after  he  became  too  greedy  for  fish.  Sad  loss  for  a  sort  of person who had lost track of the end of the day. You hear of the ones addicted to fishing who could not leave the fishing hole, not knowing  when  enough  was  enough.  These  fish  gamblers  never knew when to stop. Well! It was the truth of the matter. The story  goes  that  those  doomed  men  became  lost  in  a  sea boiling  with  dense  schools  of  large  fish  –  like  salmon  on  the  run, balling  the  bait  schools.  So,  they  followed  the  dark  patches  like clouds  in  the  water.  It  was  the  worst  kind  of  fever,  following  fish night and day for days, pulling fish in, throwing them on the pile, stacking  up  more  and  more.  By  the  time  their  overloaded  boats sank,  even  the  birds  had  become  fat.  They  sank  with  their  boats, craving  with  their  whole  heart  and  soul  the  odour  of  rotting  fish gut. There have been some fish gambling survivors. You got to pity them,  the  ones  you  see  hanging  around desperance  with  that funny,  faraway  look  on  their  faces  –  like  a  stuffed  mullet.  They skulk around looking like flea-bitten dogs, running from corner to corner, hiding behind fences and in other people’s yards, escaping from  no  one  because  they  think  someone  is  trying  to  stop  them heading back to sea. It was hardly surprising to see their crying and gnashing families rushing up and down the Shire Council’s roads, swinging  around  their  long  sticks,  trying  to  chase  their  crazed relative  away  from  the  boats. do   not  feel  pity  when  you  see  a family flogging the fish gambler half unconscious. don’t waste your breath  calling  the  government  who  own  all  the  essential  services like  social  welfare  in  cities  down  South.  No  one  can  shake  the magnetic forces put in a fisherman’s skull by the sea woman. C aught in the sphere of the sea lady, Norm saw, over in the distance, ghostly dark waves moving like haunted spirits. In the air  he  heard  a  melancholy  swishing  monologue  humming  and drumming the advance of the front moving helter-skelter towards him, while up in the skies, its spiral disappeared into the heavens. Norm,  centre  stage,  prepared  himself,  for  he  was  a  brave  man, and  he  was  warrior-like,  in  readiness  to  face  her  army  of mourning ladies. He remembered the old people watching these clouds from the long grass along the shores of desperance and turning away, they always asked the same old question, Say! Do you know who they are boy?  Yes! Norm knew the widows. They belonged to a lifelong premonition  –  one  which  linked  his  destiny  and  theirs:  the eternity  of  the  disappointed  dead  travelling  in  the  seasonal storms of the summer monsoon. Watching these clouds in their haphazard  race  around  the  skies,  he  saw  their  glorious  watery costumes  of  mourning  colours  lined  with  silver  sprays  that looked like torn lace, decorated with little unstitched pearls. each  widow  rose  to  wail  in  majestic  heights,  showering  him with  teary  froth,  as  they  tore  forward  with  the  faster  north-west winds. The haunted spectres loomed higher and higher into the skies  until  they  could  no  longer  hold  their  dignified  pose,  and collapsed down on themselves with a spectacular and extravagant chain of lightning and thunder above his head. Norm applauded. Bravo! he called appreciatively to each dramatic gesture. Salty tears poured from his windswept eyes. each flawless performance made space on the celestial stage for a throng of others, each as large and foreboding as the other and with as much power to whip up even more exciting winds. By executing the dwindling south-easterlies, these new winds produced in Norm a lightness, a spring in his step, he would have run  if  he  was  not  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean.  For  half  a  year, particularly  in  their  peak,  the  south-eastern  winds  had  roared through  the  cracks  of  houses  after  midnight,  looking  to  snaffle humanity  from  sleeping  people’s  hearts.  Now  this  dying  force, outnumbered  and  outflanked,  could  only  fight  back  with  the weapons  of  those desperance  homes:  so  many  disappointed dreams and the doomed tenor’s song of unrequited love. oh  my! Norm reminded himself he had better stay alert while sizing up the strength of the storm, unless he wanted to be remembered as a theorist who drowned in his own daydreams. This was how the opposing trade winds interlocked in war, blew the top off the lid, and  out  would  fly  the  navigator’s  mental  map  of  the  groper’s travel line. The storm  intensified.  The  currents  resulting  from  the  two opposing trades colliding with each other lifted the surface waters to  look  like  an  enormous  wart  jutting  out  from  the  sea.  Norm locked his arms around the steel seat of his boat while it rolled and tumbled into the lull. He prayed as his body smashed down on the bottom  of  the  boat  and  swore,  before  tumultuous  lashings  of  sea water tumbled over him. He had moments to spare when the boat rose  rapidly  out  of  the  water,  and  only  enough  time  to  gasp  a mouthful of air which he fully expected would be his last, when the boat tilted to ride out the next wall of water, before falling again into the watery dungeon below. He could  have  been  an  ant  on  a  leaf  for  all  that  it  mattered. Hours went by and his body felt as though it had been broken into a  hundred  pieces,  his  flesh  pulped  into  a  bloody  mash.  He screamed for elias, ‘Come and get me brother, I don’t want to die alone,’  but  could  not  hear  the  sound  of  his  voice. reverberating back in his ears, was the thunderous crushing of waves exploding one  after  the  other. over  and  over  he  was  thrown  up  or  thrown down, but his arms stayed locked to the boat. He thought perhaps he was already dead but through his spirit, in some bizarre twist of  fate,  was  destined  to  remain  conscious  of  everything  that  was happening to him. Through hoarse lips swollen with bruises, he tried to whisper, forcing words to form in a throat that felt dry as a desert stone from  taking  in  too  much  sea  water.  The  effort  stuck  like  a  ball that was lodged painfully in the back of his throat. ‘Take me,’ he whispered  when  the  words  finally  came,  willing elias  to  come, and believing he would just slip away. What faith he had, listening hard, convinced he had heard elias tapping under the floor of the boat. Yes! Yes! elias had come back but could not do anything to help  him,  Norm  knew, elias  was  there,  trying  to  come  aboard  to help him. Finally, the legions of warring spectres ceased fire, the waves dropped,  the  storm  subsided,  and  in  the  skies,  the  viper’s  box sprang  open.  The  victorious  north-west  winds,  still  crazed  into conquering the seasonal change, blew the heavy rain in horizontal lashings  that  blistered  through  the  sea.  Norm  lay  broken  and semi-conscious  in  the  salty  waters  on  the  floor  of  the  boat.  His body  throbbed,  his  skin  was  raw  to  the  flesh,  and  his  ears remained deafened by the sound of the world into which he had intruded.  He  shifted  himself  with  relief  out  of  the  stinging  sea water, as he felt movement underneath his little boat driving him away with great speed. Lying there, too injured to move, unable to lift his face into the screeching rain, Norm only saw patchy clouds resting low on the water, whenever the rain eased. occasionally, he saw large flocks of sea  birds  travelling  in  the  same  direction. even  in  the  storm,  he knew  the  birds  would  not  lose  their  orientation.  They  would re-route and head for land, and sometimes when he looked closer, he  could  see  that  the  birds  were  actually  sailing  with  the  wind, barely working their wings, as though they were being blown along. Many hours  had  past  since  the  storm  had  started  and  every time  Norm  closed  his  eyes,  over  and  over,  wanting  to  sleep,  he struggled to stay awake. remembering to pray, he started reciting the  Act  of  Contrition,  ‘ oh!  My  God  We  are  sorry.  Forgive  us  our trespasses,’ and then he stopped. Church had been a long time ago. Pausing  momentarily,  he  tried  again  to  recite  the  prayer,  before stopping  to  linger  once  again  on  the  perplexing  word trespass . Trespass had been a big word in his life. It protected black men’s Law  and  it  protected  white  men.  It  breathed  life  for  fighters;  it sequestered  people.  The  word  was  weightless,  but  had  caused enough jealousies, fights, injuries, killings, the cost could never be weighed. It maintained untold wars over untold centuries – trespass. Trespassing  was  the  word  which  best  described  his  present situation, and it occurred to him that he was wrong to have taken this journey with elias in the first place. He should have just let the girls  dispose  of  the  body.  Yet  he  called,  ‘Push  the  boat elias  and don’t worry about me.’ But he could not stay awake, and the last thing he saw spinning through a labyrinth of maritime tunnels was himself. He knew at once that he was entering a spiritual country forbidden to all men and their wives and their children’s children. In his dream he saw himself,  as  if  looking  from  above,  in  the  aquatic  seafaring  vessel called Trespass . As he watched the boat, he saw himself gliding along with  the  wind-driven  current  in  a  straight  line.  He  passed  place upon place where people once lived in the sea. All were devastated but  each  destination  in  turn  propelled  him  into  another,  while pushing him further away into stranger places that had once existed. each  of  these  sacred  places  was  wretched  of  hope,  yet  somehow capable of snatching the faith he himself had difficulty in holding, until he felt so depleted he knew neither where he was, or how to retrace  the  route  he  had  been  taken  through  to  navigate  his  way home. If he hoped to find his way back, he knew his hopeless task was to visualise and commit to memory the multitude of landmarks. An unfamiliar voice pointed out that these were the wrecked artefacts of  an  ancient  past  fossilised  in  parts  of  the  sea  where  the  likes  of people living, who ought to leave well enough alone, should never have ventured. What he saw he knew should never have been seen again, but all the while, he was unable to turn his head and look away. He heard the names of places in a harsh language which was both  strange  and  uninviting.  Passing  through  the  tunnels  of  the watery  labyrinth,  he  noticed  the  sides  were  lined  with  a  flowing substance not unlike slime, but when he looked closer, he saw these were  ancient  webs.  The  longest  broken  threads  of  these  webs joined others in an entangled mass. They reached out like tentacles attempting  to  ensnare  the  boat  as  it  passed  through  their  halfwoven sacs. He envisioned himself entombed in their secret places of antiquity. Forever, until one day his spirit began crystallising into a  towering  wave  where  the  trade  winds  meet  locked  in  battle.  In this  future  of  eternity,  he  lived  on  as  a  fighter  of  wars  that  were never resolved in life by becoming a death spirit, a thing so strange, it was perpetually salvaging little pieces of humanity by preying on lone seamen such as he once was himself. Norm  awoke suddenly, startled by a breathless sensation of drowning  in  his  dreams.  The  rain  had  eased,  and  the  little aluminium  boat  continued  to  move  at  a  rapid  speed,  as  though being pushed by the invisible hands of the sea on and on in its flow with the currents. Norm knew he was moving in a north-easterly direction, and there was nothing he could do. All he could feel was that d esperance was now a long way south-west from the direction of  the  flow.  Sometime  in  the  night,  the  wind  dropped  suddenly, and  the  world  seemed  a  better  place.  For  a  further  two  days  the boat drifted with the movement of the north-east flowing currents. Whenever Norm had the strength to try the oars, he would attempt to  row,  but  found  he  could  not  against  the  will  of  the  sea. each time,  his  oars  would  lie  flat  on  the  surface,  and  would  be  swiftly wiped back to the side of the boat. Norm knew it was hopeless for him to change course for desperance. Throughout the day, he trawled for fish, and was able to catch enough trevally to start eating regular meals again. When the sun was overhead, he sat with his jacket over his head for shade, even though the heavy clouds stayed close to the waters. Sometimes he quietly sang country and western songs as though borrowing wellused treasures from his house. While he was lost in the music he visualised each of his children growing alongside a particular piece. otherwise for the life of him he could not remember what any of his  children  looked  like.  Always  he  took  careful  notice  of  the movement  of  birds  reappearing  over  the  sea,  observing  their direction,  where  they  were  heading,  where  they  had  come  from. Then, on the third day, he was awakened by a sound he had long forgotten.  In  the  first  dull  light  of  morning  spreading  across  the waters, there were several green snakes streaking across the skies. As the formations moved closer, he was relieved to see many birds flying towards him. ‘Land! Yes! Land! Where are my oars?’ He knew at once that these were only common old seagulls, but they were like the angels of the sea. He was glad to see them, now he knew land was not far away. Quickly he began to row. At last, across the rise of the dented prow, as the boat rode the first breaker over the bar, he was able to see a spectacular cloud of mist sitting on top of  the  ocean.  The  surrounding  waters  were  encased  in  the  silver rays of sunlight. Soon, he was over the next, then others, until the boat slid through the shallow waters up onto the beach. Standing tall, resembling an exclamation mark on the putridsmelling beach, Norm Phantom had no idea where he was, except that he was as inconsequential as the millions of dead fish strewn with other decaying marine life at his feet. No more, no less, and as futile and forgotten, but he could not accept that this was how it was; he was screaming, with all the ravenous sea birds gathered in their tens of thousands in a white flurrying cloud up and down the misty beach, ‘I am not one and the same as…’ dead fish. dead fish. The two words were locked in his throat. The stillness  of  the  wet  bush  behind  him  reached  out  like  an open  mouth  over  the  edge  of  the  sand.  The  sense  of  foreboding that he interpreted as his doomed fate made his blood run cold. He dared not enter its domain, at least not yet. Who knew what ghosts of  women  walked  slowly  through  the  bushlands?  There  but  not wanted,  but  there  so  cheap,  it  was  almost  stupid  not  to  take  the offer. He visualised their taunting bodies opening and closing, lips moving and unable to hear their words. He looked out to the sea and the opening and closing of the clouds. There had  never  been  a  moment  in  his  life  he  thought,  as pointless as it was now. over the top of the deafening bird cries and the  occasional  sound  of  distant  thunder,  he  berated  the  cruel contradictions  of  the  sea  gods,  the  spirits  of  the  heavens,  for keeping him alive. What twist of fate was there in being dumped in a hideous graveyard, this pointless massacre of life? He spoke with arrogance and irritation of his safe arrival, calling it a joke – pure and  simple,  as  though  he  could  talk  his  way  out  of  the  present, remake the past, and order the future. ‘Sea! You listening to me at this moment I am speaking to you? You are full of cruelness, you are like women, you sea! Have you finished with me yet or what?’ In  reply,  the  sulky  waves  barged  forward,  banged,  thumped and dumped their debris further up onto the beach. He jumped out of the way but it was his right to censure the sea. Though he was  very  weak  and  feeble  from  his  ordeal,  and  overcome  with emotion  from  what  he  had  endured,  it  was  his  right  to  say something.  So  what  if  he  had  lost  some  of  his  marbles  in  his screwed up head? ‘I know what I am saying,’ he hollered. So with a  screw  loose  here  and  there,  he  flounced  around  the  rotting carcasses as though he could not smell their sickening stench. His eyes  bulged  unnaturally  from  the  sockets  where  his  dehydrated skin clung to the crevices of his bones. The wretched shorts and singlet  he  wore  the  night  he  rowed  away  from desperance  were now torn to shreds. There was no harm in letting off a bit of steam. It felt right to let all the old sea phantoms know that a man like Norm  Phantom,  even  reduced  to  a  mere  skeleton,  had  more important things to do with his life than being dumped ungraciously on a place that might not even exist. He had heard of these places before. Men caught in limbo, who were condemned to live on and on in uncharted, empty patches of the sea. The mighty  sea  heaved  and  sighed.  Waves  regardless  of  talk crashed on the beach. The wind whistled past overhead. The sea birds sang their songs here and there in their nooks and crannies late in the afternoon. Surveying the beach like a fugitive searching for a possible escape route, Norm muttered on, convincing nobody but himself of his deeply held convictions about his close relationship with  the  sea.  He  was  not  like  other  people.  Plunderers! rioters! Tyrants! So the good friend of the sea lamented his misfortune under  his  breath,  of  being  locked  in  like  a  prisoner,  of  being reduced to a little man. In  this  state  of  mind  he  started  to  see  signs  like  neon  lights sitting  on  signposts  jutting  out  from  the  ocean. road  signs  the equivalent of those on the highway south of desperance – drive Slow.  Slow down.  Cattle  crossing.  Seasonal  flooding  to  be expected.  He  read  all  the  signs  and  tried  to  interpret  them  as messages  from  the  spirits.  He  watched  tiny  insects  devouring rotten  fish  flesh  and  he  interpreted  them  as  messengers,  or disguised spirits. He deferred to a guardian angel looking over his shoulder – an old bearded image of himself that could have been his own shadow. He thought of the clagginess of the claypan soil,  and  was  drawn  to  particular  specks  of  sand  on  the  beach which he thought might have originated from desperance. each speck was as insignificant as the other. He aligned the specks into a map for it was his normal way of understanding the world. His eyes darted from one sign to the other, as he tried to link them into a lifeline, a map which would give him reason. The bush was still with the late afternoon lull from the wind, yet  it  still  felt  as  though  it  was  full  of  wild  women  slowly  walking back  and  forth  as  they  watched  his  progress  on  the  beach.  He needed  to  be  heard  over  the  silence.  It  was  as  though  the  sheer marvellous miracle of bringing human speech though silence had overwhelmed him. He talked and talked, telling the most fantastic of stories about himself. When the wind returned at half past ten at night, it was surprised to find him still talking after six hours, and it jumped at the chance of revenge. Sand flew up from the beach like  little  dust  storms  and  wrapped  around  his  fallen  words  as though it was picking up the rubbish. The sand cut into his face like attacking ants, forcing him to close his eyes, yet this did not stop him. on  and  on  he  continued,  talking  to  the  Gods,  who  had stopped ordering fate just to listen about the strange town called desperance. Sea mist poured in from the ocean to salt his wounds. The taunted waves threw themselves higher up onto the beach as though  they  were  the  bottom  lip  of  a  mouth  sulking,  trying  to reach  out  to  him.  The  bush  line  trembled  in  anticipation.  Plying the sea with words was a strange game but wiser men have done the same. Men tend to judge nature’s efforts to save them. The industrious  guardian  angel  of  good  sense  strenuously urged Norm to move away into the bushland. In its catlike mimic of  a  bowerbird,  it  cited  the  industry  of  ants,  as  well  as  the  clever beetles turning over the putrid sand, the crabs darting from hole to hole – ‘Go,’ it said, uselessly urging him to retreat to the bush. He refused to listen to a shadow, for he believed he had formed his  own  map  of  the  signposts  forecasting  his  future.  Finally,  he collapsed on the beach, where he sat with his strangely protruding eyes watching the waves roll through the night, too afraid to turn his  back  for  one  minute  from  the  ocean,  least  the  rough  wave, hiding in the black night, leap out and take him. or  had he become possessed by the sea’s mesmerising monot ony  of  endless  waves  rising  and  falling,  slap  like  they  did,  onto the  beach?  A  fearful  scene  was  unfolding  under  the  roll.  Just metres away in the murky grey waters, rolling with dead fish and their relatives, the sand, and slime-coated shells, he saw a city of faces which belonged to dead people staring at him through the undertow.  Where  even  over  the  din  of  the  waves  crashing,  and the intermittent raucous cries of squabbling birds trying to sleep, he  heard  windy  voices  seducing  him  into  the  trap  for  which  he had been waiting. out yonder, in the deeper waters, the sea woman was lurking around, waiting for him in the seagrass meadows swaying backwards and forwards under the water. This was what happened; sea men knew  she  could  be  the  size  of  an  ordinary  woman  or  she  could make herself as big as the sea itself. When he was a boy long ago he had dreamt what she looked like. He saw her running about in the ocean of d esperance with hair longer than her body reaching out around  her  like  the  poisonous  tentacles  of  the  box  jellyfish.  And her grey skin, coarse and hard was similar to the texture of a shark, although not clean like a shark. She was covered with sheer greenblue slime that clung and hung from her body like the lace which she  had  collected  from  her  jaunts,  in  the  slime-filled  caves  along the ocean floor. So  the  night  passed  into  day  with  Norm  Phantom  still ensconced on the beach as though he had settled there permanently to live. His first decision was to stay on the beach to guard the boat. He  neither  ate  nor  drank  as  he  guarded  the  only  piece  of insurance he had of leaving the land he had been thrown on. His mind  hung  onto  limbo,  a  delicate  branch,  as  leafless  as  it  was devoid of trust. That night, a mist crept over him while he slept on the beach. This  was  when  he  heard  the  devil  woman  Gardajala  singing  out from the bush. If he had been awoken by her lewd song he did not know, but he had seen her eyes shining like two golden coins – like dollars  – as she stared at him through the grass on top of the rise. She kept crying how much she wanted him to come up there to her, but he was stalwart, steadfastly maintaining his repugnance as he eschewed  her  enticements.  She  was  like  no  other  woman  he  had ever heard, calling her sexual innuendo without shame. ‘You don’t want me, old woman prostituting yourself, I am crippled up, dried up like a prune,’ he called back, in a mocking voice, speaking back at  the  bush  like  one  of  the  old  senile  men  of desperance’s Fisherman’s Hotel. But she kept on crying out loud for him, saying he was going to  crack,  saying  maybe  he  wanted  to  go  up  there  and  keep  her warm.  ‘Quiet  woman!’  Come  on,  just  one  night,  just  until  dawn. ‘You got no shame. Quiet or you will stir up herself over there in the sea watching.’ The bartering for her desires to quench his, and his to quench hers, went on until he could stand it no longer. He could  almost  feel  his  hands  touching  her  body  covered  in  yellow grass where she lay waiting for him. Miserable in his physical needs of lust, hunger and thirst, he strapped his hands over his ears, as he forced himself to recite over and over, ‘ don’t go thinking of her, don’t go thinking of her.’ Faster and faster he sang his little lines, at such an exciting pace, while pressing his hands hard onto his ears, and  she  in  return  begged  faster,  and  he  cried  singing  faster  and thinking of her, wanting her, and she cried, until their ecstasy was consummated.  Then,  they  both  curled  up  in  foetal  positions  on their earth beds, hers of grass, his of sand, and went to sleep. 

Oh!  Magic  big  time.  A  land  full  of  tricks.  The  sea  full  of spirits.  Poor  land  woman  devil  Gardajala.  The  sea woman, whose name must not be mentioned because she might be listening, far out at sea, was spinning herself into a jealous rage. She was almost cyclonic, if  you  could  believe  in  the  power  of  her  magic.  She canvassed and corralled her armies. Her movement was slow.  The  low  cloud  band  radiated  out  a  sea  of  mist  that  had already touched her old enemy Gardajala by the time Norm woke from his sleep. And all the while, all poor old Gardajala could do was  to  raise  herself  up  into  a wirriwidji   whirly  wind  to  throw  her spiteful hand full of dirt at the sea. everyone in the Pricklebush knew of the poisonous countries out  at  sea,  places  where  it  was  too  dangerous  for  a  man  to  go, where  the  spirits  dwelt,  like  the  Gundugundu  men  who  were even  more  dangerous  than k a dajala,  the  white-man  devil,  and those  of  the  unhappy  warring  spirit  warriors  of  the  old  wars. Gundugundu spirits, if riled up enough, could kill a man straight out in the middle of their stormy wars – not just leave him halfway crashing  into  the  ocean  like  what  happened  to  Norm  Phantom. The  movement  of  Gundugundu  was  always  swift.  Faster  than  a fish  or  bird.  No  living  person  would  be  capable  of  seeing  them with their eyes. only  the  old  people  blind  in  the  eye  watched  them  flying through  the  air  inside  of  cyclones.  Those  old  people  used  to  tell stories  to  their  families  when  the  cyclones  were  about.  Perhaps their stories were an invention of their imagination whenever they got  a  funny  feeling  under  their  skin,  but  whatever  it  was,  it  was uncanny how they always knew when someone was going to die in mysterious circumstances by a bolt of lightning. one would never know if it was the will of God, or whatever was out there in those waters of the oceans, but everyone in the Pricklebush expected to hear  the  news  before  someone  died  of  mysterious  circumstances during a cyclone. So say: Oh! No! They never walked to pick up souls. They got legs alright, and feet too, but funny thing that, because they do not use them, maybe they can’t but just fly about instead.  once a child asked if  they  had  any  shoes.  Some  did.  Some  wore  something  on  their feet.  Sometimes  these  spirits  had  to  travel  over  land,  travelling many  hundreds  of  kilometres  to  carry  out  their  ghastly  business, but still, they never used their legs and feet to walk. Whenever they came  to  kill,  it  all  happened  in  a  split  second.  Afterwards,  utter calm was restored. The  boat  was  stuck  fast  in  the  sand  where  the  ocean  had dumped it on the previous day. Now, as another king tide built deepening  trenches  over  the  sand,  Norm  failed  to  notice  the water encroaching around the sides of the boat and those watery arms  cunningly  drawing  back  enough  sand  to  steal  it.  Norm heard a small voice telling him to save the boat, but he refused to listen to voices, just as he had refused to listen to the sound of his stomach telling him to eat. Instead, he prayed for matches . ‘God help me to make a fire. I got to have a fire tonight to keep those devils away.’ The small voice said he would make the fire if  Norm  would  help  to  move  the  boat  up  onto  higher  ground. But Norm refused to acknowledge the voice. ‘You got to light a fire first before moving the boat,’ Norm said, puckering up one side  of  his  lips  that  indicated  he  wanted  the  fire  lit  back  up towards the bush, without turning his head around to look at it. Suddenly  –  Norm  thought  he  was  becoming  even  more delirious  –  the  aluminium  boat  was  moving.  ‘Hold  up,’  Norm grunted, but his movement was slow and weak. As he struggled to get  to  his  feet,  he  saw  that  the  boat  was  not  being  moved  by  the incoming tide, but through the efforts of a small five- or six-yearold  boy  with  his  head  bent  to  the  back  of  the  boat,  struggling  to push it higher up the beach. ‘Hold up, Will,’ Norm said, instantly recognising  the  boy  as  his  own  son,  but  the  child  ignored  him. Norm looked at the boy who was knee-deep in water, desperately pushing with all his might. Norm could not believe it, for there was Will, as though all those intervening years had not passed. Now, on his feet, somehow with the restored strength of a man half his age, Norm  was  able  to  help  the  boy  until  the  boat  was  lugged  higher onto the beach. once again, the old man’s weakness forced him to sit down on the  sand,  where  he  slipped  into  the  luxury  of  his  wandering thoughts which were more alive than the busy boy. Yet, undeniably, he could see for himself that the boy was real live flesh and blood . ‘You are a good boy, Will, always a good boy,’ he said, but the boy was  not  listening.  The  boy,  with  his  brown  skin,  covered  in  sand and dried sea salt, and wind-swept brown hair, had leapt into the boat, and was rummaging around through the plastic containers. ‘ Can  I  use  these?’  he  asked  Norm,  while  holding  out  some fishing line and hooks. ‘Sure, Will,’ Norm smiled, ‘run off quick smart and get the rest of them kids to help you.’ The boy looked at Norm for a moment and said, ‘Alright, I’ll get us some fish.’ Then without hesitation he was off, running up the  beach,  leaving  Norm  looking  at  the  waves  and  saying  halfheartedly, ‘And tell your Mother I am here too.’ The  afternoon  passed  by  as  the  sun  receded  lower  in  the horizon, until finally the clouds became blood red, and the water looked  as  though  it  was  on  fire.  Norm  thought  Will  ought  to  be coming back any minute now. It would not be easy to have to find him in the dark. His old impatience of his children returned, and triggered  his  grumbling  about  how  they  never  listened  to  what they had been told . ‘Well! I have told him. Told him many times about how much those devil-devils were looking for good-looking kids  like  him  in  the  night.’  He  began  to  hear  the  devil  woman’s voice crying and singing as she moved through the bushes behind the  sand  bank.  She  complained  about  how  her  family  would  just turn up whenever it suited them:  But you are not like proper family. you don’t know what love is.  ‘He’s a good boy. Always listens to me,’ Norm tried to reassure himself,  ignoring  the  bush  woman.  He  looked  up  the  beach where  the  boy  had  gone,  half  expecting  to  see  the  rest  of  the family  coming  back.  The  expectation  of  seeing  his  little  children rollicking  around  as  they  always  did  gave  him  pleasure.  He  held the joyful memory and took greater pleasure wiping aside all the whispering doubts in the back of his mind, questioning what was real:  saying  the  boy  was  false.  Not  Norm  though,  he  chose  the best  times  as  his  parable.  Sand,  sun,  happy  family.  It  freed  him from the impossible future that showed no easy path to the home he had left. Life was  good  waiting  for  the  children  to  come  down  to  the beach,  and  he  found  himself  promising  this  and  promising  that. everything  would  be  good  from  now  on. everything.  It  was  so good to start again, to be given one’s time over – another chance. The  waves  kept  roaring  in,  and  old  Gardajala  started  up  in  her windy song, singing, There was nothing as foolish as a silly old fool who lost his boat, lost his wife and lost his house, his children too, and what is he going to do, sitting by himself, lonely by himself, and coming by himself, to me. She could make a singsong all night out of nothing. He knew other women like that.  over  his  head,  she  blew  treacherously  taunting  words  in  her wind. He had ducked for cover behind the boat, when all at once, he  saw  her  long  hair  blow  out  of  the  bush  in  a  gigantic  whorly wind, carrying a solemn haze of red dust, large flocks of sea birds, and  seagulls,  in  among  clouds  of  white  down  feathers  from  the rookeries in the swamps over the sand rise. When she disappeared out to sea to find her opponent, he was again surprised when he looked down the beach for the boy. What came instead of children after the dust, feathers and birds, was the screeching of a lone cockatoo flying up the beach towards him. It reminded Norm of his bird Pirate . ‘Where’s your flock, boy?’ the bird hollered out its question, like so, whenever he clapped eyes on Norm walking out of the house in desperance. The bird fell out of the wind like a little spirit. The little black eyes peered at Norm. It looked and looked, until suddenly it announced matter-of-factly, in  a  flat  voice,  ‘What  are  you  doing?’  Less  feathered  than  Norm remembered him, the bird’s remaining feathers, enough for flight, were covered with filth and oil. ‘Hello old boy, how did you get here?’ Norm said, putting out his hand for the bird to come to him. A spray of sand went flying through the air as the boy landed smack bang between them. The bird jumped back in fright. ‘What the  hell  you  go  and  done  that  for?’  Norm  asked  as  he retreated his hand with its twiddling fingers. ‘You  leave  him  alone,’  said  the  boy  running  to  swoop  up  the bird in his arms. ‘You  are  handling  him  too  much  with  your  filthy  hands.  No wonder  his  feathers  are  falling  out,’  Norm  said,  chastising  the child’s dirty fish-oil-stained shorts and fish-smelling body. ‘No it aren’t.’ ‘Yes, it is.’ ‘No  it aren’t.’ The boy ploughed back up through the sand towards the bush where the whirlwind had passed with the bird perched on his head. The sea wind blew down over the top of them. Funny sort of kid, Norm thought, briefly watching the boy, reasoning it was not like Will  at  all  to  start  behaving  like  that.  A  half  an  hour  would  have passed before the boy came back down the beach, bird still sitting on  his  head,  carrying  a  blue  plastic  bucket.  When  he  reached Norm, the boy plonked the bucket down in front of him, then he took his own place in the sand some distance away. ‘Nice fish,’  Norm  said,  looking  at  four  charred-baked  barra covered in fire ash stuffed into the bucket. ‘You want some Will?’ The boy looked at Norm, shook his head with the bird on top, and sat waiting for him to eat. ‘Where’s Mum?’ Norm asked eventually, after he had eaten one of the fish. He felt nauseous from eating too fast. ‘None of your business,’ the boy replied. ‘Course it’s my business, your Mum’s my business, that bird on your head is my business too. And, you are my business.’ ‘Bird aren’t yours.’ ‘Look Will.’ ‘ And I aren’t Will either.’ ‘ oh! Then who am I if you are not Will.’ ‘ Malbu , I don’t know who you are, and my name is not Will either.’ ‘ old man am I? What’s your name then if you are not Will either?’ The boy points to the sky and says, ‘Bala.’ ‘Since when did that happen?’ ‘ That’s my name Malbu – my Mum and dad called it to me.’ ‘Your Mum and dad eh! And their name?’ ‘My Mum,’ whispered Bala. ‘Well! Her name was Hope and me dad is Will Phantom.’ Norm stopped eating. He placed the fish back into the bucket. He looked hard at the boy. He did not know Will had a child but then,  why  would  he  know  anything?  Who  told  him  a  thing anymore? of all the things Will had to go and do to the family. ‘I am going to kill that bastard  when I see him.’ Yes, Norm decided on  the  spot,  Will  had  gone  too  far  this  time.  The  old  hostilities jumped from his heart into his head. Instantly, there was no sign of Will in the child anymore. only the family resemblances from the other side stood out, as clear as day, he was surprised he had not seen it straightaway. ‘I must have been mad,’ he mumbled, unable to stop the words coming out of his mouth. He was staring at the child as though he was looking old Midnight in the face. The boy moved back out of reach, sensing the poison pouring out of the heart of the old man for whom he had cooked the fish. He thought the fish might have been one of the poisonous fish, like the puffer fish. He glanced in the bucket just to make sure he had not  made  a  mistake.  He  edged  further  away  just  in  case  the  old Malbu grabbed him because he might be a Gundugundu  man, or some other devil-devil from the sea. He might have been the one who  killed  all  of  the  fish  along  the  beach.  The  small  boy  was reminded of his Mother’s voice: ‘Stay away from all strangers here Bala.’ He knew he had to be careful and he should not have fed the old man. She said they had to hide from the bad people because they might be devil-devils in disguise. He had asked her to explain what was disguise . She said anyone he did not know. But he thought the  old  Malbu  looked  very  sick.  That  was  why  he  fed  him.  He contemplated  how  he  was  going  to  take  the  bucket  away  from Malbu because he needed to keep it. He knew his Mum would be mad if he lost the bucket. She had said  they  could  not  afford  to  lose  anything.  He  did  not  want  to make her angry. It was only that he was lonely that he helped the old man, old Malbu, because he sat on the beach and did not move. He  had  watched  him  all  day  and  when  he  did  not  move,  he  had been convinced he could not walk. It would be alright he thought to  make  a  friend  of  Malbu. even  if  they  were  friends  just  long enough  to  see  what  he  could  use  from  the  boat,  because  they needed things like fishing line and hooks. Then the old man could go back to the sea.orm  saw  how  frightened  the  boy  was  by  the  way  he  had become withdrawn. He was the living image of his father – Will the capable: ‘Will the fucking stupid who went off with that stupid slut Hope  from  the  other  side.  Living dandaayana .’  The  thought  of mixing their blood with his, was like a hex. His face twisted up into a knot. But the truth, terrible in its reality, was that any dandaayana  people  could  produce  a  child  that  looked  like  the  pride  of  the Phantom breed, which was what everyone thought of Will, until he went  stupid.  Norm  considered  how  his  own  flesh  and  blood  was the worst kind of mongrel who went around looking for trouble, until he caught the dandaayana  people’s disease which he claimed must make you stupid. Now, way out in the bloody woop woop of Christ  knows  where,  sorry  Lord  but  it  was  true,  Norm  told himself,  ‘I finds some kid who happens to be my grandchild.’ ‘Give me  the  bucket  Malbu,’  Bala  demanded,  standing  up  in the sand, with his hand out ready to snatch the bucket and run off with it. Norm gave him the bucket and thanked him for the fish. ‘I will bring you more tomorrow,’ Bala says, relieved it did not require a fight. ‘ Alright little fellow, you do that. You can take some more hooks and line from the boat if you want too.’ ‘Maybe tomorrow then.’ Norm watched the boy hurry away up along the beach where the  wet  sand  was  firm  and  hard,  and  turn  over  the  sand  dune before  disappearing  into  the  dark  bush  of  pandanus  palms  and mangroves dotting the coast. Norm brushed away the proud feelings. What was the use of it? he thought, when he knew that mixing up with the other side was what  causes  problems,  like  all  their  rotten  luck,  ever  since  the families  started  mixing  up  together.  He  knew  who  to  blame  for that. Angel. No, not the seagulls or any other kind of angel doing good  deeds  like  saving  lost  fishermen.  Norm  meant  that  woman, Angel.  For  years  he  had  watched  her  bringing  trouble  into  their home. Saw with his own eyes how she established her kind of lazy example. He knew how kids watched the Mother. They knew. He remembered  telling  her  many  times  this  would  happen  but  she ruined  her  kids  anyway,  before  walking  off  without  even  saying goodbye  to  anybody  because  she  could  not  be  bothered.  Her choice, and he cried wishing he could bring her to this place for a minute  to  actually  show  her  how  she  had  ruined  their  lives.  Life was just full of bad luck, bad luck, bad luck. If she could see this child, she would know straightaway that it was her fault. Norm  rose  to  his  feet.  He  wanted  to  fight  somebody.  He wanted to fight her. She must have heard him because she came back to fight. Norm started throwing his weight around the beach while Angel was throwing her weight around in his mind, swinging her hips in his face, a blade of sweet buffel grass hanging from her lips. The green stem stuck through her teeth bobbed up and down while  she  cursed  him. diseased  salt  fish  she  called  him. doors slammed  around  her.  It  reminded  him  how  she  loved  slamming doors.  He  noticed  he  had  even  conjured  up  his  frightened-eyed children onto the beach too, to watch. doors  opened  in  the  transparency  of  images  while  others slammed  shut  as  the  couple  pursued  each  other  throughout  a house that now consisted entirely of doors. In one of these doors, Will blocked the entrance. Norm had momentarily frozen when he saw the anger in Will’s eyes before he turned his back and walked away. The door slammed behind him with an earth-shattering din. Another door flew open. He looked to see Will again. The anger perplexed  him.  He  needed  to  see  it  again  to  make  sure  he  had really seen it at all. The doors  were  as  if  they  had  been  strung  inside  a  malfunctioning weather clock with the fairweather lady and the rainy man. In and out. one went in while the other came out. Nobody knew how the weather would turn out. Norm was amazed with the revelation. It was just like life. Here he was. He would have to start again. This he would do by building himself a new home. He started to pull everything he had left to his name out of the boat: plastic containers, oars, rope, some fishing tackle and hooks, a knife. Together he stacked them neatly on the beach in one spot. Not satisfied, the stack was shifted and restacked several times. He struggled  to  roll  the  dinghy  over  on  its  back.  Next,  he  pulled  it around side on to the sea to create a windbreak. He looked at the oars,  but  with  the  thought  of  something  happening  to  them  – snapping unexpectedly under the weight of the boat – he decided they were too precious to use. A sudden flash of pain flew through his chest. It reminded him of how he could die just from thinking about what could go wrong. What was wrong with devouring life like a big meal? ‘People did it,’ he thought, while deciding what to use instead of the oars, ‘people like Will for instance. I suppose he never got a bellyache from eating too much bad apple.’ old  rope,  old  rope,  he  decided.  He  glanced  at  the  various shapes  and  sizes  of  logs  and  bits  of  driftwood  scattered  over  the beach  from  the  storm.  There  were  trunks  of  magnificent  trees, uprooted pandanus palms, mangled mangrove trees. The discovery was just beginning. There were whole rainforest trees that had the soil eroded from their root systems by excavating floodwaters and tidal  surges.  Norm  estimated  that  these  had  floated  down  mighty rivers  from  countries  halfway  across  the  world.  They  had  been thrown out alive into the seas, and now, had washed up on scores of foreign beaches like exiles. Finally, all trees landed on this shoreline where the spirits waged their gloomy wars. There were plenty of strong limbs from branches to be found, to rig up a prop to lean against the side of the upside-down dinghy. He eventually lay down and went to sleep and dreamt of the Milky Way. In his dreams, he began sorting out the star patterns, viewing one  then  the  next,  after  which  he  jumbled  them  up  and  waited, while  some  tumbled  back  into  place,  others  slightly  realigned themselves,  and  he  travelled  along  the  new  settings,  memorising his route, then way into the heart of his sleep, the way home. This was a dream full of rich thoughts of spectacular places. The sea he saw was full of depressing wars, heavy with dark shadows of things  he  was  unable  to  determine.  There  were  no  broken  lines. each place had its own star, and he knew the only safe route as he travelled, had to be full of brightness which would only be revealed in dreams. No broken-down man, one who had lost the belief in his  own  strength,  should  follow  any  route  until  he  saw  the  stars illuminated in his dreams like streetlights, safely showing him the direction to travel. His dream died as soon as he started to follow the track. He had passed the lit road, and into the darkness, he became fearful of what lay beyond the first corner. The what-ifs. Hell if he went forward or backwards panicked him into wakeful vigilance of the sea. Although the night was not waiting for him, his thoughts of dying  in  his  sleep  from  the  fear  of  his  own  dreams  kept  him awake. When he finally fell into a deeper sleep, thoughts lingered of distant storms circling him as though they were strapped over his  back.  He  saw  the  warriors  of  the  spiritual  wars  using  their mighty lightning weapons to jump across the skies and bolt into the  earth  where  the  dead  people  raced  up  so  they  might  grow into waves as high as towers. The towers became barricades in his seaward journey. Constantly, he saw himself thrown into paths of diversion chosen by these barricades, forcing him to float around in the life of an exile in a sea maze, who knows where. In  the  morning,  he  was  woken  in  a  startled  state  by  his  own coughing and the horrible, familiar sound drilling into his brain. Listening  to  the  rain  and  the  waves  crashing,  he  recognised  the screeching  of  the  cockatoo.  The  bird  was  sitting  on  top  of  the dinghy just above him with its white angelic wings stretched wide and flapping wildly in the breeze. ‘So you must be my bird after all,’  Norm  said,  although  he  wished  it  was  otherwise.  The  bird poured life back into the soul but made you forget your dreams. When  the  bird  spotted  Norm’s  interest,  it  broke  into  the  loudmouthed  lingua  franca  it  had  learnt  in  the  Pricklebush.  For  a moment Norm thought he was home, until he realised tears were falling  from  his  eyes,  and  the  cause  of  his  coughing  was  dense smoke. He had almost cried, for on the sand in front of him he saw the remains of a fire, and in the ashes of a log that had burnt all night, the unburnt bits were still smouldering. For a long time he sat looking at the fire, throwing bits of dry sticks in to get it started again. If he could keep the fire going, he would be able to look after himself forever. or at least, for as long as it takes either to die or survive. There would be no need to go running  to  the  no-good  son  to  save  him,  wherever  he  was,  who could have at least checked on his own father’s health . ‘I could be dying  you  idiot.’  Never  mind  about  giving  the  likes  of  him  any thought.  Now,  with  the  fire,  Norm  reasoned,  while  rubbing  his hands together, he would be able to catch whatever he wanted: fish, crab,  prawn,  plant  and  animal  from  the  bush,  and  cook  it.  He reassured himself as he surveyed his surroundings that from what he could determine, a man could get real strong in this place. He felt certain that it must have been the boy. Norm guessed the little fellow had come back in the night and made the fire to keep the devils away. This was good. He was a good boy. Where was he? Norm looked up to the bush but saw nothing except the pandanus palms now laden with red nuts which he had failed to notice before, and further down the beach, closer up to the water mark,  thick  mangrove  swamps  stretched  into  the  sea.  It  was  low tide over the mudflat. The view was empty and lonely. Surveying the  broad  stretch  of  its  circumference,  Norm  looked  out  for  the boy;  so  long  as  he  did  not  show  up  with  his  Mother. even  the blessing  of  a  night’s  sleep  was  insufficient  to  soften  his  resolve never to set eyes on the parents as long as he was able to breathe air. The plan was short-lived. Norm strolled off down the beach in search of the boy. ‘Bala,’ he called several times up to the bush, but received no answer except a lonely silence. The copycat bird called, ‘Bala,’ and Norm watched it fluff its chest feathers. It occurred to him that if he followed the bird, he might be able to find their camp. He would not go into the camp itself. It would be the last thing he wanted to do, to go about inviting himself to his son’s place. He decided if he found the camp, he might go nearby, stand off in the bush where he  could  have  a  bit  of  a  look.  See  what  sort  of  turnout  they  got themselves, these invisible people. Norm  knew  that  Will  could  look  like  a  pandanus  tree  if  he wanted to hide. He knew how to melt away into countryside. In a flat  stretch  of  claypan,  Will  could  flatten  himself  out  behind  the clumps of yellowing grasses and become caked mud all afternoon while a search party walked all over him. Norm knew there were police  searching  for  Will, shame  of  the  family .  The  government were  after  him  too  and  you  do  not  go  around  playing  with  the government  –  mucking  them  up.  ‘It  was  not  dangerous,’  Norm thundered,  pushing  Will  out  of  the  yard.  ‘It  was  plain  stupid because  nobody  can  change  the  government.’  Norm  had  often heard some government politician talking about Will on the radio. He remembered listening to all the talking voices describing Will Phantom as a curse to the Gulf who had to be stopped, and Norm agreed. He empathised with the tone of the voices he heard over the radio talking about the trouble Will was causing to everyone in  the  Gulf,  and  in  the  State  of  Queensland,  and  the  nation,  by stopping business at the mine. ‘They sound the same as me,’ he said happily. ‘We all want to kill the bugger.’ Always trying to save the world, well, look where it got him. Norm  turned  and  surveyed  the  emptiness  of  his  surroundings and the cloud-filled sky. This was where you end up from trying to stop the mine and ordinary people from doing their work. He wished the people from the radio station had come around and interviewed  him  about  Will  because  he  would  have  told  them everything they wanted to know. He would have told them it was not  only  the  white  people  who  wanted  to  kill  him.  There  were Aboriginal people who wanted to kill the bugger too, including his own father. Go ahead police. Go and find him and lock him up. ‘I made  you  somewhere  to  stay  old  man,’  Bala  said  when  he arrived. ‘ Ah!  Bala!  I  am  alright  here,  I  got  to  stay  here  and  mind  the boat.’ ‘No Malbu ,  it is too dangerous here. We got to get off the beach and hide the boat now,’ Bala said firmly. The boy  started  to  kick  sand  over  the  fire  but  Norm  tried  to stop him by reaching out and pushing him away. The little boy was too  quick,  ducking  and  weaving  himself  from  Norm,  keeping  on the other side of the fire, kicking more sand over the fireplace until he had smothered the smoke. Then he went around the back of the boat and knocked it down flat. ‘ What did you do that for?’ Norm yelled at him in an angry voice. ‘Shh!  Listen! Be quiet. This is a quiet place. Always quiet. Always hide.’ The boy pointed out to sea, then pointed up to the sky out at sea, and brought his arm down and around until his hand slapped down on the boat. He gave Norm the serious look of Will Phantom, who spoke with the gravity of the final word on any matter. ‘Shh! And pack up, Malbu, cause I got to take you away from here.’ ‘You  put  that  boat  back  up  you  little  bugger,  go  on,’  Norm demanded. The boy ignored him and started to pick up a plastic container but  Norm  pulled  it  back  and  placed  it  in  the  neatly  paraded belongings of all he had left in the world. ‘Where’s that  father  of  yours  anyway?  He  should  have  come down to see me. When I see him I got words to say to him. You tell him to get his black arse down here and tell me what he is doing here, because I am waiting and I am sick of waiting. I don’t know what  they  are  going  to  say  the  world  is  coming  too,  when  I  tell them a little boy is going around telling his old grand-daddy what to do.’ ‘You are an old man but you are not my grand daddy because my daddy said he is one smart man, even if he is not talking to us, and  sometimes  he  only  talked  rubbish  anyway.  I  know  one  thing for sure, you not smart, Malbu,’ the boy did not mind arguing back as he snatched for the plastic containers. He was talking his head off just like his father: diverting while trying to make a grab at any of the old man’s precious belongings. He was determined to make off  with  the  pieces  he  snaffled,  until  there  was  nothing  left  for Norm to stay around for. ‘What you say about you daddy? Him saying what? If his name is Will Phantom then I am his daddy. You tell him to come down here at once because I want to talk to him.’ ‘Y ou prove it first.’‘How  am I going to prove it? You just do what I tell you, that’s what,’ demanded Norm, feeling hungry. He had not eaten yet and the situation was becoming annoying, and he would be telling Will straight  out  as  soon  as  he  clapped  eyes  on  him  just  what  kind  of Mother he had given his son. ‘Fancy yourself now stuck with one of those Wangabiya  dandaayana   kind.  Where’s  their  manners?’  The boy was like an animal. This was what you get when you do things against your family. He would tell him that. To search for their daily food… Squadrons of sea birds from rookeries in the swamps flew low over  the  beach,  then  gradually  ascended  into  the  cloudy  skies across the low tide mudflats towards the darkened sea. Simulating his grievances with the world, Norm Phantom lay prostrate in the sand in a statuesquely comic pose, wishing he were dead. Bala was thinking of leaving the old man lie there with his battered dinghy forever.  The  birds  flew  around  performing  single  loops before  dropping  down  like  projectiles  onto  the  mudflat.  Slightly distracted by their performance, the child reminded himself to scan  the  skies  for  the  bad  men.  The  old  man  had  created  a dangerous situation for them. Whatever interest he originally had of befriending the old man was fading. even the possessions he had snatched  seemed  useless. each  would  only  have  a  limited  life. Fishhooks  break.  Fishing  lines  end  up  snagged.  He  was  not interested  in  lugging  around  the  plastic  containers  or  the  Pepsi  bottles. He was tired of carrying things around. With a little scratch under his salt-laden hair which was for  ever itchy , Bala estimated that his own gear would last awhile, and all he had to decide to do was to run away. The old skeleton man? Well! He would leave him. He could live or he could die. Most probably he would die soon. The child thought the man would probably die when  the  next  high  tide  came  rushing  in  with  a  storm. either today, he thought, or tomorrow. It did not matter, for he would die. And  if  not  by  the  sea  plucking  him  right  off  the  beach;  well,  he would  die  when  the  bad  men  returned.  Bala  felt  cold.  He  could already feel the presence of the other men sneaking along the bush line when it became dark. If the old man was just sitting out on the beach  like  a  sitting  duck;  well!  they  would  sneak  up  until  they captured him. He thought of his Mother again and he felt scared and wanted to run. She had warned him to leave no signs for the bad men, and here was old Malbu with his boat tilted on its side, like a big shiny beacon. Its storm-scoured underbelly would be seen from  the  sea,  and  if  they  came  flying  in  a  helicopter  again,  Bala knew they would see it easily from the air. ‘ You want some duck?’ Bala finally asked. ‘What duck?’ ‘I’ve got a duck if you want it.’ ‘ Well! Alright, you get it then and we can cook it together if you like.’ ‘ I’ll  get  the  duck  if  you  promise  to  help  me  make  you another camp.’ ‘ And what about your Father, will he come there too?’ ‘Maybe, I’ll have to ask him and see what he thinks.’ ‘ did  he  tell  you  I  take  fish  from  the  ocean  and  make  them dance in thin air? I bet he didn’t tell you I am the best fisherman that ever breathed, or that I can talk to the birds for company, and I  follow  the  tracks  made  by  the  stars  so  I  never  get  lost,  and sometimes,  I  go  away  fishing  and  never  come  back  until  people forget my name?’ ‘He told me you make your family cry and if you know all of those things then how come you got lost?’ ‘You go and get the duck.’ Bala  stalked  off,  straight  back  up  over  the  sand  dune,  and disappeared into the bush. on his way, the child thought about the possibility of finding a wondrous old man in someone like Malbu. Was it true he could follow tracks made by stars? He must have lost his power to make people cry. Malbu  reminded Bala of a lot of things. one night, when he was out in the boat fishing, his father told him, if you know the stars  you  can  always  find  your  way  home.  Since  that  time  he always looked at the vast network of stars at night. He was already teaching himself so that by the time he grew up he would know how  to  travel  in  the  skies.  But  as  for  mixed-up  Malbu,  who  got washed up in the bad storm that carried off half the beach, threw up  dead  fish,  and  stranded  dugongs  to  dry  out  and  die  on  the sand, Bala believed he was lucky to be alive. of  course  he  did  not  know  what  he  was  going  to  do  about Malbu, since he thought Malbu was an idiot. If he knew his way by the  stars  like  a  magic  person,  he  should  have  been  able  to  drive storms away too, shouldn’t he? At least the old man was too stupid to be one of the bad men. If he had been sent by the bad people he would  not  have  mentioned  his  Mother  because  he  would  have known she was dead. All of his questions came with quick answers. If Malbu was his grandfather it did not matter because his dad said they had to be alone, and his grandfather made his family cry. All he wanted was for his father to come back so he could tell him what had happened. He wished he never found the old man who  made  him  think  too  much.  He  wished  the  old  man  had  not come  at  all,  because  up  to  now,  he  had  been  alright  just  looking after himself. It had been pretty easy because all he had to do was what  his  Mother  had  told  him  –  keep  out  of  the  way  of  anyone. Now, angry with himself, he located and tried to frighten as many roosting birds as he could find, while lamenting how he now had to get food and water not only for himself, but carry it all back for the old Malbu too. The pandanus  bulalula  palms  and  she-oak  trees  closed  in behind the boy with a swish, as though the bush wished to conceal him as he walked through the yellow green grasses that stood a metre tall. His feet were hardened like any bush animal’s to tolerate  the  scorching  ground  littered  with  burrs,  and  he  passed on,  upsetting  nothing,  completely  unnoticed  by  the  peewee birds  and  crows  resting  in  the  silent  melaleuca  trees  and  paperbark  woodland,  decorated  for  Christmas  with  bouquets  of  red mistletoe  flowers  and  the  sleepy  olive  vines  of  wild  medicine  and maloga beans. As Norm watched the boy tramp over the rise, he considered following  him  into  the  hinterlands  of  the  island.  The  moment passed.  He  had  no  courage  to  explore  its  unfamiliar  territory. Instead, listening to the crows culk and chuckle to each other, he understood  they  were  talking  to  each  other  over  vast  distances. Perhaps  they  had  the  whole  island  under  surveillance.  Their sounds  only  emphasised  how  much  he  did  not  know.  How  to interpret  his  feeling  of  the  presence  of  the  many  spirits  which belonged to this place? The crowding over the sand dune made him feel as though he had arrived on the outskirts of a town, full of anxiety and anticipation. Yet, in reality, the landscape gave the impression of being a dead country. Something that belonged to  no  countrymen.  He  felt  incapable  of  deciphering  between authentic vision and what he had falsely created for his own benefit. He sensed that only the sea claimed this land. Inside the bush, whatever powers – dangerous, malevolent – were crowding on the other side of the sand dune, he believed had originated from the sea. Terrible truths tumbled from his mind. The night sounds of souls divesting themselves, were possessed, without shame, with a yearning  for  the  roar  of  the  ocean. underneath  him  he  felt  the sand was full of the sea’s malevolent powers. A poisonous country sapping  his  strength.  More  and  more  he  dreaded  its  hinterland. Things had to be different. This was not his destiny. Norm thought it was just like Will to have made a pact with the devil spirits so as to settle his family on such a place. Nobody else  would  have  thought  of  such  a  haven.  With  no  other  logical explanation for his being dumped by the sea in the same place, Norm assumed he was being punished for Will’s dalliance. In his imagination, a man thrown off course in a storm that should have killed him, should have at least been allowed to end up anywhere. There  was  the  whole  world  for  goodness’  sake.  Why  the  same place as Will? Well! So far, with his son Bala, so far. Thinking about Bala, Norm grew more positive about his own circumstances.  How  could  he  explain  Bala?  It  occurred  to  him that Bala was in the realm of God’s providence. And he suddenly realised  why. of  course.  His  fingers  snapped  automatically:  an action of forgotten years which even surprised him at his age. He knew it. He would have to look after the boy, because the boy was alone, there was no Will and no Mother either. He now understood why the child kept coming by himself and avoided answering any requests to bring his father. He saw the child’s face looking out to  sea,  something  of  Will  in  his  face,  something  unexplainable, the look of fortitude which only belonged in the faces and eyes of seasoned soldiers. So,  where  were  his  parents?  Why  was  the  child  alone?  He wished  he  could  be  wrong  even  though  he  knew  differently.  He felt the truth in his bones. Anxious again with the disturbance of thunder, he half expected something terrible was going to happen to them. In a flash, Norm saw a large hawk swooping down, talons, hooks, before these snapped through his back. Through sickening eyes he saw the sea underneath spin by until his release: a fall into a bloodied nest. The vision vanished. Norm surveyed the seascape, closely examining every bump in the ocean, out past the birds wading in the distance of the out  going tide, to  the  breakers  and  beyond:  anything  that  showed  signs  of moving. His eyes scoured from one end of the beach to the other. The  skies  were  growing  fuller  with  thick  clouds  quickly  passing over  the  coastline,  punctured  by  flights  of  birds  returning  to  the rookeries. It would not be too long before it started to rain again. Norm was in two minds whether to wait on the beach for the boy to return, or to start moving the boat up over the sand dune before the storm arrived. Bird squalls calling up the rain could be heard coming out of the clouds, as well as the occasional throaty sound similar to an old man clearing his throat. It was the channel-billed cuckoo heralding its arrival from its long flight overseas: And people died useless deaths. People  who  were  fishing  people,  people  who  grew  crops,  people  who  had families  and  told  each  other  stories. Norm  shook  his  head.  He  had heard the stories a thousand times. He had to concentrate on the bird  squalls  warning  of  the  drop  of  pressure  in  the  atmosphere. Somewhere out at sea a swell was building and might turn into a tidal surge. Norm expected the incoming tide would be affected by the winds and the power of the storm. It would bring in the surge and it was going to be high. Still, the  wise  weather  birds  hovered  stationary  in  the  air  like beacons out over the tidal flat. Their heads turned in the direction of the oncoming storm. All he could do was wait for their judgement. one  by  one,  the  birds  dropped  from  their  hovering  positions, noisily signalling squalls to the others below, and took flight. This meant  one  hell  of  a  storm  was  heading  directly  towards  the coastline. Anxiously, Norm scanned the rise hoping the boy would appear.  ‘Why  did  he  not  see  the  clouds  running  inland?’  The skinny-legged  foraging  birds  were  lifting  off  the  tidal  flats  and quickly  returning  inland.  Soon,  they  were  joined  by  other  birds flying back from places further offshore. From far out at sea, the big, black frigate birds flew in, travelling at great speed. He estimated they were flying at one hundred miles an  hour.  They  were  getting  out  of  the  way.  The  low  clouds  of densely-packed white birds flying towards him as they made their way  inland  had  assumed  the  supernatural  appearance  of  the spirits. Norm had never seen anything so spectacular or beautiful as this flight of the ancestral beings of the sea. Their flight was so low, each time one of these clouds came towards him, Norm had to bend over to avoid a collision. Weighing  up  demons,  Norm  was  convinced  that  the  spirits lording over the sea were a much worse fate to relive again, than the devil woman and her cronies living in the bush. So, placing a length of rope around the top end of the empty boat, he dragged it up over the sand dune. He knew the last straw, a moaning wind, or even a lesser howling wind, would be sufficient to pick up the boat like a toy and throw it around the beach. With the boat settled amongst the pandanus, he returned to the beach to collect the remainder of his fishing gear and the oars. He looked for the boy. The clouds were even more ominous with lightning shooting spears that exploded back and forth across the skies. Norm dragged the boat further inland where the bush was denser,  and  its  hanging  branches  closed  like  doors  behind  him. He tied the boat against a large eucalyptus and stacked all of the containers  inside.  He  made  a  place  for  himself  and  the  boy  to shelter out of the winds behind the secured boat. every now and then he went back down to the beach to wait for the boy to come, but  still  there  was  no  sign  of  him.  Perhaps  the  boy  had  decided not to come back. It was hard to tell. The wind was now howling in  from  the  sea  and  the  flying  sand  was  cutting  into  his  body. Norm  knew  he  had  to  take  cover.  Maybe  his  father  was  around after all, and took the kid off some place else. As long as he was safe,  thought  Norm.  He  headed  for  cover,  struggling  over  the sand dune, until he reached the boat. Bala was in the swamp when the storm struck the coastline. He had heard the birds coming back to the rookeries, but having made spears  from  the  spearwood  trees  in  the  swamp,  he  was  intent  on stalking a group of ducks. At first, the wind made the waters ripple, and  then  it  blew  faster  until  the  slender  trees  were  bending  to ground  level.  Water  poured  down  the  sides  of  every  rise,  down from  the  low  hills,  through  the  gullies  and  into  the  swamp,  and very quickly the knee-deep water was up to the level of his neck. The boy struggled to keep his head above water and stay afloat in the deeper waters that were pouring through the swamp in a flood. The swamp soon became a wide river roaring though the bush as it found its ancient path down to the coast to join the sea. Meanwhile, the  tidal  surge  had  overtaken  the  mudflats,  as  its grey waters moved in faster and deeper to drown the mangroves and slap itself against the sand dune. When it could go no further, the waters poured back to the sea, forming a wave that grew as it came rushing back to force itself against the sandbank, and again reaching its pinnacle, retreated. each time this happened, millions of tons of sand were carried back in the roll. As Norm listened to the deafening roar of the sea stripping into the sand dune, he knew the sea would eat its way through the sandbank and tear into the bush. The boy had quickly lost his foothold in the flooding, and the dumularra  floodwaters hurried him swiftly away through the bush. rushed along with everything else, he saw branches, trees, hollow logs – the boa constrictor snake hanging off the top of a platform of leaf litter. He had lost the duck he had caught. He reached out for  tree  branches,  but  no  sooner  had  he  gripped  a  hand  full  of leaves or a branch his weight and the speed of the flooding waters pulled him away. The jackhammer waves tore further into the sandbank. Norm, forcing his way through slapping branches bent over by the sheer force of the oncoming wind and rain beating into his face, unable to see further than a few metres ahead, struggled to crawl up to the top of the sand dune. He looked down at the clawing waters and saw nothing else. He knew that the other side of the wall had been torn  down  and  at  any  moment,  if  he  did  not  move  fast,  the  rest would topple. He rolled down the dune and ran. The lashing rain tore at his hands as he worked as quick as he could to untie the boat. Panicking, he roped the plastic water containers,  while  pouring  out  enough  of  the  stored  water  to decrease  the  weight  inside  the  dinghy.  He  hauled  the  loaded boat  through  the  wet  eucalyptus  and  melaleuca  bush,  in  his desperate bid to find higher ground. Soon, he realised he was struggling to stay in front of the little boat as it slid easily over the wet leaves. Hurried by the gale force of the tailwind, both he and the dinghy flew through the flattened bush side by side. Broken branches and snapped trees bustled past, sometimes crashing over them, before stumbling on. each of these flying objects resembled the yinbirras . These were fairy-like people the good storytellers told about the strange Yanngunyi  tribe whose true home was beyond the sea. The yinbirras , they said, were related to all of the tribes. These Yanngunyi were people who lived beside other real people, and even  though  you  could  hear  them  going  about  their  daily business,  shouting  at  each  other  to  listen,  they  would  not  let anyone  see  them  because  they  ‘did  not  want  to  be  found’,  or ‘made  civilised’. or   something  else  could  have  happened  to these half-deaf fairy creatures. The old people hotly debated the fate of the Yanngunyi. envoys were dispatched to debate theories throughout  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria.  They  even  went  back  and forth  between east  and  Westside  camps  to  talk  about  the  latest ‘so-called’  glimpses  of  the yinbirras .  The  old  people  of  Westside remained resolute however, that sometime, no one remembered when, because  no  one  was  keeping  a  look  at  the  clock ,  those  people simply disappeared into the wilderness of life. Why? Because they did not want their histories contaminated with oppression under the white man’s thumb. They were  pure  people  and  the  storytellers  said  they  were black angels. It amazed him to see them running past him through the  bush.  Some  were  quick  runners,  faster  than  any  kind  of ordinary  person  he  had  ever  seen  before  in  his  life.  He  kept moving as quickly as he could to save himself, but all the same the  yinbirras   sent  cold  shivers  running  right  up  and  down  his  spine. Not that he was frightened of them, or the bush woman Gardajala, he was far too preoccupied for her. What kept screaming through his head was the fact that he was on the land, beyond the sea. The yinbirras  too kept running, but tried to distract him by calling out to him in their strange tongue. He looked behind and saw others running  along  in  the  same  direction  as  him,  normal  people, women  and  men  carrying  their  children,  and  old  people  being helped along by the younger people. There was something even stranger in the way that they ran, it was as though they glided through the bush, but perhaps he was doing the same because he felt light and the boat felt even lighter. People appeared on both sides of him, and when he looked behind because  the  boat  felt  as  light  as  paper,  he  saw  some  young  men were  actually  pushing  the  boat  from  behind.  A  fish-faced  old woman with eucalyptus leaves strewn through her wildly flowing, wet  white  hair,  sat  in  the  boat.  She  gave  him  a  toothless  smile although  he  could  see  she  had  a  look  of  sheer  terror  written  as plain as day, all over her face. While shielding his own face from the  rain,  he  tried  to  call  out  to  her  over  the  thunderous  sea slamming all of the world’s rubbish into the sand dune. ‘ Wanyingkanyi  ninji  nanagkurru  jila? ’ What are you doing there? And she, like a queen, said grandiloquently, ‘ Wawaru . Nothing,’ she said.  ‘Nothing.’  Her  voice  had  a  guttural  sound  as  though  a  tree had spoken. Then she said things to him in a language he did not understand.  She  looked  as  though  she  was  quarrelling  with  him, and  when  he  kept  looking  at  her  and  not  understanding  a  word she was saying, she gave up. Instead, still scowling, she wiggled her fingers  at  him  to  look  ahead  if  he  did  not  want  to  fall  over.  Her action excited Norm’s curiosity even further, for when she wiggled her fingers, he believed he saw fresh green eucalypt leaves spring from their tips. The leaves immediately flew through the wind and several  hit  him  in  the  face.  He  smelt  her  astringent  aroma,  and when he was stung in the eye, he instantly turned his head back to the direction he, they, she, the wind and rain were heading. Now fully  focusing  his  attention  ahead  of  him,  and  following the others running through the bush, and believing that they must know where they were going, since he knew he had no clue at all where he was, he hoped to reach the high ground. Then, through the sound of waves crashing in the distance, a chorus of voices was calling  him,  something  like malirriminji  wadara  Malbu ,  old  prickly bush humpy man. They knew where he was from. He felt he was in the middle of another nightmare. He had to turn around, just once, to see his tormenters. Now the boat was crowded with old fish women  who  bared  their  open  mouths  at  him.  He  guessed  that there  had  to  be  at  least  twenty  crammed  together  like  sardines, hissing him on. To his disbelief and incomprehension, for he knew that  together,  they  could  not  have  weighed  a  kilo,  because  it  cost him  nothing  to  carry  them.  These  women  were  also  dressed  in muddy clothes scattered with leaves and foliage fallen from trees, as though they had just risen from the wet ground where they had been sleeping. He turned briefly to check how clear his path was ahead, to be sure  there  were  no  trees  to  smash  against,  and  when  he  looked back, he yelled, ‘ Wanyimba ?’ They did not change their expression or  respond,  and  he  screamed  at  them  again,  ‘ Wanyimba ?’  What’s wrong?  ‘ Wanyimba ?’  Finally,  their  gaping  mouths  found  voice, which was the sound of total fear: an ear-piercing primordial roar that pierced him to the core of his bones. Again, the finger wiggling began, ‘ Kurrkamarra ,’ many mob, with the leaves springing out of their fingertips, and as he was about to shield his eyes, he saw that this time they were pointing directly to the ground, Looking out for safetyness , they seemed to be saying, and when he too looked down, he  saw  the  bad bari   waters  creeping  along  the  sides  of  the  boat. Now,  he  knew  he  had  to  travel  faster,  run  faster  from  the bari  waters, run in the direction the others were going even though he felt as though he was breathing in the rain, running out of breath, and to keep ahead of the boat, which was moving faster again with the young men with heads bent, pushing from behind. The sea waters had overtaken the bush, and in every direction he  looked,  water  was  running  across  the  land.  He  tried  to  see ahead, to see if they were coming to higher ground but visibility was  limited  because  of  the  rain.  It  was  hard  to  tell,  perhaps  the ground  was  rising  slowly  above  sea  level.  They  seemed  to  be reaching  nowhere.  He  thought  that  his  guardian  angels,  this ghostly tribe, would run forever. Perhaps this was the only way to escape  the  tidal  surge.  Perhaps  they  were  taking  him  to  the Gardajala woman of the bush. He almost felt if he turned around, he would actually see her sitting in his dinghy, a finger resting on her cheek, ironically contemplating his fate. He was so convinced that  she  was  staring  at  his  back  with  her  icy  eyes,  he  heard  his heart  thump  over  the  thunderous  roaring  of  the  sea,  until  he almost collided with a tree. He ran on, not knowing how much longer he could last. The island could not be that large. or had he underestimated its size? Was reality larger and parable truer? What if all of those old hags back there in the boat were Gardajala women? And what if he had mistaken their look of horror, when in fact what he saw was his own face reflected in theirs, like wet mirrors. His pain chased away the thoughts  which  strangled  his  mind.  Still,  he  saw  no  sign  of  hilly country ahead, not a single rocky outcrop, nothing but flat country. His throat felt it was on fire and his lungs would explode. He did not have much more left in him to run. Through the  soles  of  his  feet  he  searched  to  feel  changes  in geography, telltale signs of gravel indicating they were moving to higher  ground.  Nothing  changed  however  from  the  pacified softness  of  sand,  and  his  splashing  through  the  rising  waters pulsated in rhythm with his heartbeat. He started to feel that there was no hilly country on the island, the ghost people were running nowhere. Was he being run to death? He had joined a dying race. His fear terrorised his legs with numbness. There was nothing he could do to prevent the heaviness of his body slowing his pace. Finally , Norm caught his first glimpse of something happening up ahead. The bush people were not running anymore. They had  come  to  a  slight  rise,  not  large  in  space,  but  it  seemed  to be  holding  out,  just  metres  above  the  flowing  waters.  He  saw that there were about thirty or forty of these phantom people huddling and shuffling together, while the rain fell over them, like it does over leaves in the bush. The little  sea  of  people  became  quite  volatile  when  they  saw Norm trying to pull his boat up to the higher ground with his cargo of  old  women  still  sitting  there.  Several  of  them  began  running towards the boat while screaming and gesticulating at the men who pushed the boat from behind to help them. They literally dragged the  old  women  from  the  boat  and  Norm  watched  in  stunned silence as he saw that they were dressed in what looked like sodden, inflorescent  compost  heaps  where  the  rain  ran  through  the crumpled  leaves,  bush  blossoms,  tangled  strands  of  grasses  and twigs  before  splashing  down  onto  the  muddy  ground.  It  took several  people  to  lift  up  each  of  the  women,  who  in  return complained  bitterly  about  their  undignified  treatment,  and  a fusillade of leaves flew everywhere off their person, while they were half dragged, half carried in an undignified manner to the higher ground, to join their kinfolk. on   the  other  side  of  the  rise,  Norm  saw  a  river  overflowing with the incoming king tide, and joined by all of the floodwaters gushing  down  from  the  southern  foothills.  Its  incredible  flow twisted around a hundred kilometres of stories the prophets had tabled in the scriptures of law, safely locked away in the vaults of their minds. Somewhere along the route the two floodwaters had converged.  Norm  knew  not  far  north  was  the  coastline,  from where  he  had  just  escaped,  and  this  was  where  the  river  would empty back into the sea. The phantom men were bare chested and in assorted coloured shorts, much like himself, and it occurred to him, that they must trade  with  ‘real’  people  somewhere.  He  tried  to  argue  with them about the boat but they kept yelling at him in their strange language,  and  raising  their  hands  up,  gesturing  exasperation  to match  the  looks  on  their  faces  because  he  did  not  understand. Several  of  the  men  kept  on  rummaging  through  his  belongings throwing  things  on  the  ground,  until  they  found  what  they wanted. This was Norm’s anchor rope which was long enough for their liking. While still screaming instructions to each other, one of the men began to secure the loose end of the rope to the stern of the little tin boat. Norm stood watching, until he was lifted up like the old women, and under protest, half dragged to the boat. Norm did not know what was happening with everyone yelling and screaming, and pointing down the flooding river. He was put into  the  dinghy,  and  whenever  he  tried  to  get  out,  hands  sprang forth  to  push  him  back  into  a  sitting  position.  He  did  not  know what  was  expected  of  him  as  they  launched  him  into  the  flood. The  boat  quickly  took  up  speed  as  it  moved  through  the  metrehigh  foam  gathered  near  the  bank  to  join  the  raging  torrent  of yellow  waters.  About  twelve  men  who  were  holding  the  rope, gradually eased out more of its length, slowly, knowing that if they let  it  slip  too  fast,  the  boat  would  turn  broadside  and  overturn. Norm, unsure of what was happening, kept looking into the heavy rain  falling  between  him  and  their  serious  faces,  while  his  hands worked the oars, while he calculated how much rope he had stored in the coil. The boat kept making its way down the river heading towards the sea in the storm. The men handling the rope were starting to look a long way away behind him. Soon, Norm saw that they were forming  a  human  chain  in  the  waters,  while  more  and  more people were coming down from the rise and joining the men, who were  being  dragged  along  with  the  flood.  Norm  saw  the  serious faces of those closest to him, and feared that it would only take one man to be dragged under, and they would all be dragged into the undertow. He  turned  to  save  himself  when  the  boat  stopped  suddenly, until he saw it had jammed in the branches of a lonely rivergum. He looked back at the men desperately trying to keep the human chain  together,  then  he  turned  quickly  to  disentangle  the  boat from the tree. It was then, through the heavily pouring rain, he was  able  to  see  in  amongst  the  branches  and  leaves  piled  up together, the boy. ‘God have mercy,’ he cried. ‘Let him be alive.’ He pulled the boat in amongst the foliage, but it was useless trying to get any closer. ‘Bala! Bala! Wake up.’ He called to the boy but there was no response. Norm realised he would have to leave the boat  and  climb  over  the  rubble  of  foliage  to  reach  the  boy  and untangle him. When he was close enough, he reached out. ‘Come on Bala,’ he urged,  but  the  child  just  looked  at  him  and  clung  tighter  to  the branches. Norm started to pull him away from the branches, but the  frightened  boy  struggled,  saying  he  was  staying  with  his Mother. Norm could see that Bala thought he was wrapped in his Mother’s arms, and it suddenly occurred to him that the boy believed his Mother was dead. did this mean that Will was dead too? ‘I think your Mum wants me to take you now Bala,’ Norm said, speaking gently, while working to pry his little arms out of the wet branches.  ‘She  asked  me,  she  said,  “Grandad,  would  you  mind coming to take Bala home now?” and I said, “ of course. I will make a good journey home for me and Bala.” I said to her, “We will be waiting  for  a  little  while  until  the  stars  come  back  and  tell  us  the right way, and then we will go with the big fish, follow the big fish, straight through the sea, with the right wind coming our way, and we will be going straight home, fishing all the way.” And you know what she said, “That’s good, take Bala now and I will see you later and  tell  him  that,  tell  him  I  will  be  looking  after  him.”’  Norm looked at the boy’s weak face with rain pouring over it, but he saw Bala  was  listening.  Finally,  he  released  his  grip  for  a  moment, which was enough for Norm to pull him back to the boat. As soon as they were both on board, the dinghy started to move backwards, while  Norm  rowed  to  keep  it  heading  straight  for  the  rise  in  the flooded river. As he looked across the river, he could see the chain of men struggling in the water to bring the boat to safety. one by one, they helped each other out of the water, while pulling the rope towards them. ‘ The bad men took Mummy,’ Bala whimpered, as he sat locked between his grandfather’s legs, while Norm rowed towards land. ‘ Then, I heard her screaming in the sky, and when I looked up, I saw her fall into the sea.’ It was Will’s voice Norm heard rushing back into his mind. His face,  hard  and  defiant,  snapped,  ‘ one  day,  Men  will  kill  for  this mine, remember that.’ Norm only saw the fury of an injured being. Moments before, a helicopter had buzzed over their heads. Its shadows fell over the house as though casting a bad spell on their relationship.  Will  had  a  contemptuous  look  on  his  face,  full  of what? disappointment,  or  more:  revulsion  for  a  father  who thought so little. ‘So blind,’ he had taunted, shaking his head. ‘And so completely satisfied with the status quo.’  everyone knew about the security helicopters patrolling the district at regular intervals. All  times  of  the  day  and  night,  the  helicopters  flew  along  their grids,  throwing  shadows  across  the  Pricklebush.  The  memories passed. Norm looked down at the little boy’s head and cried in relief. rain, tears, rowing the flooded river, he knew this was the solace  of elias:  how  he  used  his  death  to  help  an  ignorant  old man find his grandson, to rekindle hope in his own, joyless soul. He rowed. The  ghostly  tribe  was  already  leaving  by  the  time  Norm pulled  the  boat  back  through  the  foam. one  by  one,  they  had started  disappearing  through  the  flooding  bushlands,  most likely following their own familiar roads back to the hilly country further inland. They had tied the end of the rope to a tree. Norm left  the  boy  in  the  boat  and  quickly  pulled  it  along  through  the watery  bush,  searching  in  the  direction  where  the  strange  tribe was  vanishing  into  the  rain  ahead.  In  his  mind,  he  had  a  vague plan to gain the highest ground before nightfall. If he could reach a  hill,  he  would  climb  the  summit  and  wait  for  the  sea  to  stop ploughing into the coastline. A  summit had to be found. There would be no point moving after  the  skies  turned  dark,  because  the  people  he  was  trying  to follow  would  have  dissolved  into  the  bush  of  night.  He  knew  as soon as night fell he would never see them again and his memory of them too would be gone. 
Even God goes around like one thing, they say… Too good! even  everyone  sitting  around  nice  in the  Pricklebush  say  they  knew  who  the  maker  was. Phoney talk was often spoken there: Oh! yes! We know him  personally .  Hmm!  Hmm!  Just  like  they  knew November over the flat country. oh ! Heavy heart, if  you  were  to  see  miracles  happen,  look  to  the heavens  in  November.  See  him  properly  for  yourself  in  those dark,  stormy  skies  of  the  Wet  season  build-up.  Look  for  the giant in a cloak. Brace yourself when he comes rolling through the  dust  storm,  spreading  himself  red,  straight  across  those ancient  dry  plains,  heading  for  town.  Watch  carefully  for  the evaporation  creeping  down  invisibly,  right  into  the  ignorant minds of the people living in up town and, you know what? He turned some of them mad too, just like all those people you see living about over there in the Pricklebush. That’s right. The giant sugarbag man of the skies walked from horizon  to  horizon,  carrying  storms  and  hazes  of  madness,  and sweat!  Humidity  was  plain  old  sticky  syrup  falling  through  the atmosphere like a curse. Fools. People went for it. Went mad from it. uptown called the sugarbag man spirit ‘seasonal rains’, or their ‘silly  season’,  and  among  them  there  were  fatalities.  Statistics rocketed in mortality for both black and white, when the air grew heavy and fat. The perpetual dampness was terrible. It lasted for weeks on end, and how sick and tired of it people became. every day, grimacing with the glare, they gazed upwards hoping for rain, and  chucking  their  weight  around  for  good  measure  when  none came. You should have heard them. Presumptuous to the core, the way they assumed so much familiarity towards the Almighty maker: Calling out in their cynical voices – God! you never seem to end . Have they  gone  mad?  Secret!  Air  caused  madness.  Sanity? Where  about?  Lost,  like  respect  was,  trampled  in  the  sodden ground.  The  mindless  buggers  split:  ran  off  to  the  bush.  Very likely careering around dressed as feral fairies or devils, and who knows what else they thought they were, hugging trees, or hiding among  spinifex  like  birds,  and  some  never  came  back. others turned killers without cause. everyone, regardless of colour, had to put up with it along the shores of the Gulf, before the rains came. Meanwhile, mould  of  strange-coloured  greens  invaded  every dampened premise, person or thing. The mildew, fed on moistureladen  air  steaming  up  from  the  earth,  spread  a  magical,  sealike world  above  water,  throughout desperance.  This  short-lived phenomenon  was  regarded  as  something  strange,  occurring outside the realm of nature, before the dust storms came to slam doors open and shut. The mould could cloud rational thought, and they ( up town) said some funny things to each other. When hard put by the weather, they found the words to describe a multitude of flukes, and this year, when Norm never came back from the sea, was no exception. For  years  it  was  believed  that  the  hens  of desperance  had become  bewitched  and  purposely  covered  the  eggs  they  laid  in  a putrid  fowl-yard  muck.  It  was  like  that  when  the  build-up  called into town like an enchantress whose prime motive was to saturate everything and cause creatures of domesticity to become demons. dogs and cats became covered with infectious sores from head to tail, and sat scratching themselves all day long. The oldest children in  the  population  of uptown,  well  on  the  way  to  becoming  real Aussie  battlers  up  North  of  the  country,  were  one  step  ahead  in being  more  suspicious  than  their  parents,  and  without  a  word  of doubt,  cautioned  younger  siblings  at  the  breakfast  table.  They sniggered, saying how they knew a real googie-egg when they saw one, or which were imposters used by perverse parents to insult the intelligence  of  children.  ‘Them  the  ones  that  come  out  of  those ugly,  bare  bum  chooks,’  they  squirmed,  visualising  the  moulting chooks down the backyard walking around in the mud. ‘If nobody moves  that  egg  from  the  table  I  am  going  to  vomit.’  Whispering about  the  foetus:  ‘See,  that  black  thing?  That  is  the  faeces  of  a devil.’  A  sledgehammer  would  not  have  forced  one  of  them  little uptown kids to open their mouth for an egg after that. See!  All  summer  long  it  went  on  like  this:  What  to  do  with children of uptown  who would not eat egg? of course nothing but those grimy eggs had to be the main topic of interest when those little Pricklebush boys, the petrol sniffers, were arrested and taken to  a  shimmering  silver,  green,  gold  and  red  tinsel-decorated  jail. Tristrum Fishman. Junior Fishman Luke. Aaron Ho kum. Three little boys. There was a roar for those three little boys, saying, ‘They got their just deserts.’ They got their just deserts? You could spend the rest of your life examining those five words, change the sound, bend them, twist them up, even change it into something like: Just deserts! They got theirs. Like eggs. Hey! There was no cause for a speck of glitter, no fortitude of spirit to waste for them three. Why had no one walked right down there to Main Street of uptown, to bail out of jail any one of the little petrol-sniffer boys who had been accused of viciously killing Gordie, the neighbourhood watch, the night  when  Norm  Phantom  had  rowed  away,  taking elias’s  body back to sea? Citizens  protected  by  the  net  to  keep  trouble  away  –  secure citizens,  living  in  real  houses  with  nice  graded uptown  streets  – needed to talk about ways of producing clean eggs from backyard hens,  so  they  watched  their  pet  fowl  very  carefully,  to  add  to  the conversation. Vogue was what vogue was. Nobody watched for the little boys down in the jail. The hundreds of inbreds kept strutting about, free ranging, and with the moult, appeared half plucked, while bucketloads of summer  downpours  rained  down  on  them.  Hours  went  by: beautiful linear hours. The casual prickly bush observer, either east  or  Westside,  knew,  with  the  kids  of up town,  inbred  fowl had no brain. The town camp people never ate those eggs. The grocery shop tried to flog cheap, dollar a dozen, dollar fifty for two, in the cartons of proper eggs which came from clean farms, ‘ down South’. Same thing, people started to get scared of anything else, foodwise, uptowners  produced  to  eat,  like  vegetables,  fish  cakes, sponge  cakes  on  fête  day.  You  could  never  be  too  careful  of catching something. There was no point asking for problems. In  this  era  of  modern  domesticity,  where  personal  interest smothers the hope and joy of all of mankind, no one in up town ventured  outside  of  their  louvred  homes  where  windows  were tightly shut. So much caution about the colour of skin had been dragged from the past into the new millennium. They said it was to  prevent  all  the  goings-on  in  the  street  from  moving  inside their  homes  with  the  breeze. outside,  in  the  backyards,  they watched,  investigated  and  took  note  of  fowlry  shuffling  around in  mud-bearing  ulcerated  chests,  and  flashing  red  raw  bums  of the summer moult. day in, day out, nothing seemed to be happening for the boys accused  of  killing  Gordie.  They  were  left  there,  locked  up  in  the town’s  little  jail,  known  as  Truthful’s  planetarium,  neglected amongst  the  crowded  foliage  of  the jarrbikala ’s  strappy  and  viney tropical indoor oasis, feeling like they were starting to rot. Nobody gave  a  continental  that  those  boys  were  standing  in  the  same clothes  they  had  been  arrested  in.  Clothes  turning  mouldy  in the  damp  cell.  If  they  had  looked  all  sweaty-skinned  from  the humidity building up in the bullyman’s jail, nobody noticed. That they waited sine die  for justice was nobody’s concern . ‘You are going to get your just deserts for this. You are all going to pay for this, just you wait and see,’ the boys were told enough by Truthful, who, not accounting for the initial brief sideshow, when everyone in town wanted to have a look at the accused killers the day they were arrested, had increasingly become their only human contact. It often seemed to the boys, as the hours passed by, that the waiting  for  justice  seemed  to  be  becoming  the  punishment  itself. They  watched  Truthful  cleaning  up  around  the  jail  building  and they could see, and he wanted them to see, that he was really proud to be an active, crime-stopping policeman again. It was obvious to the boys, watching his every move, that their jailer drove down to the pub himself to get their meals. It was not easy for e ’Strange. The hotel cook, his single aide-de-camp, shook her fat permed head of stiff mauve-tinted hair in disgust, when she handed over three disposable plates of meals wrapped with alfoil. ‘Lovie, you are wasting you time,’ she warned him, as though the food  was  too  good  for  those  boys.  The  clientele  watched  the methodical Truthful going past by the glass windows of the public bar  carrying  the  meals  at  the  taxpayer’s  expense,  and  grumbled into the bar that it was a bloody waste of taxpayers’ money and why don’t they shoot the little buggers? The  three  boys,  Tristrum  aged  ten,  and  his  brother  Luke Fishman  aged  twelve,  and  Aaron  Ho k u m  aged  eleven,  all  Bob Marley  look-alikes,  had  asked  no  questions,  did  not  expect  any favours, and asked for no one. Together, when they had been left alone, when sure no one was listening, they huddled in a corner spinning  out  in  a  whirl  of  raw-felt  fear,  clawing  into  each  other, believing they were not humans. often, they spoke about how they thought they were being kept like lizards in a zoo. Sometimes, they would hazard a guess by trying to make heads or tails out of why they were there in the first place, waiting for their ‘just deserves’. Spinning  on  their  addiction  and  sudden  withdrawal,  they interpreted ‘just deserves’, as the impending time when Truthful would molest them. The terrible murder of Gordie during the night of the first seasonal storm left a sour taste over little Götterdämmerung, the twilight of the Gods, some called the ceremony of thunder, on the  eve  of  heralding  all  the  nights  of  stormy  weather.  This particular  night  was  the  same  night,  coincidently,  that  Norm Phantom had cast off into the gloominess of the open sea under the  pretext  of  going  off  fishing,  and  never  came  back.  It  was surely strange, given that the whole town regarded Norm with suspicion,  accusing  him  of  many  unsolved  crimes  in  the  past, that  no  one  laid  a  finger  of  blame  on  him  for  Gordie’s  death. The  other  murders  Norm  had  been  accused  of  were  not  like Gordie’s  murder  at  all.  Those,  they  agreed,  were  only  black murders.  This  was  different  and  required  the  very  best  one could expect of civil action from the Australian law. So,  this  was  what  happened.  Quietly,  the  town  celebrated Norm, the fisherman’s fisherman’s return to the sea. Years ago, before he stopped fishing, Norm’s relationship with the sea had been  a  beacon  of  light  to  others.  His  understated  prowess  in maritime adventures had led all nature of mature men to believe that they lived in the good company of a sea wizard in God’s own country, and once again, simply from living in close proximity to Norm’s  prickly  bush  camp,  his  good  luck  would  naturally  flow onto all the others who went fishing too. The pressure imposed from the weight of seamen’s graves lifted. All negative thoughts disappeared.  There  was  no  longer  an  ocean  full  of  bad  omens and impending deaths. Norm made it safe for others. everyone could  go  to  sea  now,  even  if  only  in  fishy  dreams  of  trevallyloaded  seas.  What  other  explanation  could  there  be,  for  the heavy  cloak  of  suspicion  reserved  for  Norm  Phantom  to  have been lifted so swiftly, and without a shadow of doubt? The nights that followed were full with a thousand elaborate dreams of seas so choking with fish, it was easier to walk over them, than take a boat. All the  brave  hearts  talked  fish  at  the  Fisherman’s  Hotel.  In calm  conversation  building  in  gentle  waves,  they  said,  ‘And  why should he come back?’ It was a time for wishing and great solace was found in it. They wished that they too had no reason to come back. everyone  wished  to  escape  paradise  from  time  to  time. Wished to slide away in the middle of the night out to the storms, throwing their fate to the sea. So this was how it was. Ineluctable, magical moments of lightheadedness flowed through town during the humidity. Somebody had been murdered, some boys had been arrested, and somebody had  left  town.  Normal!  Although  many  often  complained  about ‘the  dead  town  with  no  life  to  it  at  all,’  and  frequently  lamented how they wanted to leave one day, it was pretty difficult to un  buckle the notions  of  permanence.  The  constricting  binds  strapped  into their  lives,  strangling  them  with  the  fear  of  possibility.  Nobody found  it  easy  to  leave  their  life:  home,  friends,  parents,  grandchildren. A known place to be buried in when they died. There were not many who were prepared to take a gamble with leaving  a  place  like desperance.  Yet,  the  town  boasted  an  above average representation of professional gamblers. The leader by a long  shot,  was  the  mayor,  Bruiser,  regarded  by  some  as  possibly being an alien, because he knew how to brush with good luck. He sat about inside his modern lounge room with a couch bigger than anyone  else  had  to  sit  on,  on  those  stormy  nights.  With  brown Nugget and brush, people spoke about seeing Bruiser polishing up his old bookie’s leather money bag, in readiness for the dry winter race day, to set up his bookie box outside of the pub. But Bruiser daydreamed  about  money  traffic,  where  anyone  passing  could wager  for  or  against  Norm  Phantom  ever  making  it  back  to  the melancholy seashores of desperance. When Bruiser  brought  the  leather  bag  into  the  Fisherman’s Hotel  hoping  to  catch  what  he  called  the  ‘night  swill’,  word  got around desperance. All praise to the sea. is he our man of absolute sea fidelity? Fifty to one, he’s  not.  Very quickly, wishing became excitement and entertainment. The gambling fever overtook the town’s shock at  the  murder  of  Gordie.  The  pub  became  so  congested  with gamblers  and  arguments  about  seamanship,  that  Truthful  was called in to see what he could do. The owl-faced barman, who was implicated in the murder case by being the father of one of the boys in  jail,  although  he  had  never  owned  up  to  his  paternity,  helped Truthful  to  build  a  queue  of  those  inside  the  small  crowded  bar, jockeying for space. Yesterday,  all  of  the  town  was  up  in  arms  about  the  killing. Their  usually  complacent  faces  had  turned  aghast,  knowing something so terrible could grab your heart and violently shake you  into  the  quick  pulse  of  the  world.  It  was  a  pulse  that demanded pay-back from your knowledge of having a little bit of secure  life.  It  asks  you  to  deal  personally  with  a  world  where children kill. Initially, so shocked were these shattered townsfolk, they cried out to each other, What has the world come to?  It was a difficult thing to deal with, this deception in their little world of desperance.  Their  lives  were  solid,  built  on  generations  which had  through  the  decades  guarded  their  net  of  privacy  and minded their own business. Parents in this world believed in its unique position to the rest of  the  world.  Lives  could  be  lived  in  the  pristine  vastness  of  the quiet  mud  plains,  silent  saltpans  and  still  spinifex  plains,  where children grew up with a sense of nature and the knowledge of how lonely the planet could be. Children in this world belonged to the thinking of fairytales which came out of books, or else, the happy life  of  children’s  television.  Theirs  was  the  quiet  world  where murder was not a child’s toy. Initially ,  when  people  of uptown  heard  of  Gordie’s  murder, they  had  remained  in  their  houses,  examining  their  souls,  never expecting  to  be  confronted  by  a  hideous  crime  committed  by children. This was the sort of thing that only happened elsewhere in the mean, bad world, where the crazy people lived. They knew this  because  they  had  seen  the  lot  on  television  and  felt  lucky,  it was  not  Australia.  Never  in  their  wildest  imagination  had  they expected to see the likes of downtown desperance splashed across television, like New York, Jerusalem or kosovo. So, unlike  the  rest  of  the  world,  it  was  decided  by  the  Town Council that nobody was ever to see the crying face of desperance on television. It made a humble request to the citizens to keep their mouths  shut:  ‘We  don’t  want  anyone  thinking  we  are  not  decent people.’ The silent word spread the usual way by the invisible net’s strictly  confidential  notification  system,  through  word  of  mouth. The town’s ranks closed. even a fly found it difficult to penetrate such a closure to lay its maggoty eggs. This was truly the only place on earth where decent, lip-sealed people lived. No one would see desperance laying its soul bare. No one would see perplexed faces stretched  like  fawn-coloured  lino  across  the  nation’s  screens.  No one  would  see desperance  as desperance  saw  the  world  –  static broken  and  lacy  lines  for  the  seven  o’clock  news  punctured  with electrical storms, until a complete blackout was achieved. This was fondly known as nature’s censorship. No one would go publicly to the world at large asking, ‘How could this happen here?’ So, poor  old  Gordie.  The  whole  town  cried  as  they  rallied together  one  way  or  other  to  help  the  victim’s  family.  There  was praying to do. The burying. They would take their part on the jury to  see  justice  was  done  when  the  case  finally  came  to  the  district court. everybody  thought  mightily  of  their  poor  old  Gordie.  ‘He never hurt a fly,’ they said. Initially , on that eventual morning, on the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the month of November, when Gordie did not play the  remembrance  bugle,  everyone  thought:   Alright!  Something  is astray.  Something  smells  mightily  funny  to  me.   Although,  at  first, everyone had thought very little about it. Perhaps Gordie was sick with the summer flu. Nothing to be done about that. Life went on as  usual. desperance  was  a  normal  town  where  even  the  bugle player had as much right as anyone else to get sick with influenza and  stay  home  in  bed.  Normal  people  knew  how  to  tell  the  time without  depending  on  a  clock,  or  a  signal,  and  had  enough decency, unlike the rest of the country, to stand for one minute’s silence in respect of the fallen on the eleventh hour, even without the  bugle  of  the  returned,  to  remind  them.  However,  valiant attempts  at  normality  could  not  replace  the  bad  smell  in  the  air. The people of uptown, without realising it, started waiting for the bugle. A wave of uneasiness flowed through the town. They felt as though  someone  was  playing  around  with  their  sense  of  security. everyone  started  to  look  out  for  Gordie. When  will  he  come?   they complained.  he should have been by  by now.  Fair weather or naught, everyone knew Gordie walked the town, even if he had influenza, doing his job to the hour, but naught had happened and this was not good. The day was ruined because of Gordie. ruined more than they thought. After the rain stopped, some poor  unsuspecting  anyone  was  whimsically  walking  along,  with thoughts only of ploughing through the mud with a useless pair of thongs on their feet, on that same path now through the bush, and minding  their  own  business,  when  Gordie  was  found.  The  body was  steaming  like  hot  bread  with  the  two  o’clock  sun  pouring down.  Well!  After  that,  it  was  Lordy!  Lordy!  There  was  nothing abstract  about  hell  breaking  loose  in desperance.  The  town  bell would  not  stop  ringing  under  the  flagpole  where  the  bugler used to play the remembrance tune. every single citizen, first-class, second-class, third-class and any other riffraff after that, had been summoned onto the Council lawns. All ears rung with the talk, talk, talk which followed on for what seemed like hours. The powerful voices of the Town Council were overwhelmed with emotion when they said to the assembled populace, that it was a miracle any of his physical remains were found at all. The Christian  connection  on  the  Council  said  Gordie  must have had a guardian angel, because nobody would have found him at all if he had not been covered with blowflies . There must have been millions of the  buggers , they said of the wet body. They were as thick as a black cloud . They said, those people who were at the site, that if you had moved within a certain closeness, Gordie looked like some kind of disjointed black buzzing devil letting off hot steam. you could even see various parts of him jumping up here and there, and  the  rest  of  him  –  Well!  Let’s  say,  thank  God  his  Mother  was  in  an institution. And two, the Council ought to start doing something about all of those camp dogs. Anybody should be allowed to shoot the bloody lot of them  on  first  sight  whenever  they  go  up  and  down  Main  Street.  Bloody nuisance they are. The  whole  town  began  participating  in  an  uproar  about wandering dogs and petrol-sniffing kids. Find out where they come from and get the damn lazy government in Canberra to ship the whole lot back there. Send them all to Canberra. No, the body was not a pretty sight, and the ugly head of all of those  wild  pig  stories  resurfaced  about  the  ghost  of  Abilene. Terrible memories were opened up again. The grisly bush deaths in the past two or three decades, which could be counted on one hand,  very  quickly  became  exaggerated  into  something  else. This sort of thing  happens all the time , chimed some of the more disturbed townsfolk. It was the kind of talk that got everyone revved up and excitable. Volatile language was used. There were  others  who  had  to  bring  the  cemetery  into  the equation, by making one sour point after another about who was buried there. Anybody. Anything. Sometimes not even a body was even put into a grave. There should be rules about burying things over at the cemetery. ‘You  want  to  know  the  truth  about  the  cemetery?’  A  loud foghorn of a voice piped up. ‘It is chock-a-block full of graves with bags  full  of  the  bits  and  pieces  of  incomplete  bodies.’ everyone knew  who  was  talking  because  the  foghorn  man  had  insisted  his son be buried there after he disappeared. everyone knew he had just run away from desperance: driven off in his Falcon after halfa-dozen send-off parties. Some day he would return, and find he had already been buried by his father. The old people from the Pricklebush who had been picked up by  Truthful,  and  forced  to  attend  this  meeting,  were  not  very happy  at  all  with  this  talk  about  the  cemetery.  They  spat  on  the ground  at  each  piece  of  tripe,  while uptown  moved  sideways  in perpetual motion. It was they who saw all the dead people walking off into the afterlife. What uptown liked to call tritaroon, quadroon, octaroon, full blood, or if speaking about themselves, friends and neighbours. or, else, those broken parts, looking like a far cry from God’s image of a quintessential man. Imagine that. A  bizarre soul hovering  forever  over  the  district,  searching  with  the  eye  of  an eagle into the guts of an albatross for the rest of their parts. They knew throwing stones dipped in holy water never worked miracles. or,  leaving  the  gizzards  of  a  cow  on  the  spot  of  the  fallen. or, throwing into the ocean, a pot of stale urine taken on the night of a  full  moon  six  months  previously  by  a  sober  person  from  an intoxicated person. Nor any other chic, New-Age spells that people tried, to cast away the evil from invading their homes. If you were dead and still hanging around searching for parts of your body, your  soul  might  choose  a  better  home  than  the  miserable  one you had before. Such was  the  wisdom  of  the  elders.  They  said  it  was  to  be expected  that  people  who  believed  only  those  who  helped themselves got along in life, would resort to magic even in this day and  age,  although  they  never  expected  the uptown  mob  would own  up  and  say  they  were  involved  in  it.  These  were  seriousminded  people  who  had  escaped  wars  and  famine  from  all  over the world. This was why the elders were quiet at the meeting about Gordie.  Anything  could  happen.  Who  knows,  they  whispered, what  ideas uptown  would  put  into  their  heads  from  losing  their Gordie.  ‘ remember!  Who  bloody  knows  what  kind  of  traditions people have, who say they came from nowhere and don’t believe in their own God anymore.’ Sometimes people  like  Norm  Phantom  called  the  community disarray of uptown the net of irrelevance. It did not take much for ordinary  Pricklebush  residents,  family  people,  to  see  what  the elders  were  able  to  see  all  along. deaths  like  Gordie’s  gave  the townsfolk  the  heebie- jeebies . They  became  hooked  into  a  subconscious mind  which  was  used  to  seeing  things,  particularly  in those  typical  red-tinged  cloud-covered  skies  of  the  Gulf,  the narwhal-coloured disembowelled spectre of the supernatural. Half the town claimed, on the gospel truth, they owned extraordinary gifts of perception enabling them to see ghosts, as though it was like the purchase of a new car. everyone  was  blaming  the  petrol  sniffers  for  killing  the neighbourhood-watch  person  Gordie.  But  those  little  boys  were never told why they were in jail. The three little boys did not speak or ask questions because they knew not to listen to anyone in town. They had been told, Every time you go into that town, close your ears to those white people who might not even be human, who may be, may be not . up town was a world apart, like the spiritual world, which could be  imagined  by  children  to  have  living  there  white-man  spirits like fairies, goblins, elves, imps or leprechauns, or something else more sinister. What else could be true, if they had come from out of  nowhere?  It  was  hard  not  to  listen  when up town  talked  so persuasively. But little kids want to live, so they closed their ears up good. When  the  town  had  come  together  on  the  day  they  found Gordie dead on the path, not many of the people who lived on the outskirts,  whose  houses  did  not  qualify  for  the  protection  of  the net provided by municipal services, bothered coming up to town. ‘Who cares what,’ the Phantom sisters grumbled. They agreed that they were not going anywhere near the town, if they had to stand within  inches  of  those  smelly  land-thieving  cunts  from  the  other side. ‘Talk about your own business yourselves,’ Janice Phantom joked, looking towards the town, up the muddy track, as though she had the power to be heard long distance. For good measure, she held out her full left arm, with her index fingers giving her best ‘up yours’ signal, while her right hand shook the other arm up and down. ‘You wanta stop being so stupid,’ Patsy told her, and Girlie agreed. Patsy was trying to feed a bowl of stew to k evin with a spoon. She  was  annoyed  with  her  brother  because  he  knew  he  was  an imposition, and by clamping his mouth shut on her, he was creating even  more  of  a  nuisance  of  himself.  She  knew  he  was  sulking because his father had gone to sea without him, but that did not bother  her,  so  before  too  long,  she  put  her  best  effort  towards forcing the spoon through his lips. Girlie had  just  taken  a  shower  and  was  feeling  better  after spending at least thirty minutes watching the alcohol-ridden stench of  Truthful  wash  into  the  drain.  There  was  no  way  any  of  them were going to tramp through a kilometre of muddy road just to go and listen to a bunch of rednecks. kevin, seeing Girlie come in with just  a  towel  wrapped  around  her,  opened  his  mouth,  and  Patsy stuffed  it  with  several  tablespoons  full  of  the  thick  mix  of  meat, potato and carrots. ‘Well! That’s that then,’ she said, quite satisfied with herself that the meal was finished. ‘When is that blasted bell ever going to stop ringing?’ she said. She had half the mind to go up there and bloody well kill whoever was ringing it. The  town  clerk  Valance,  with  decades  of  background  in municipal service that had never prepared him for the likes of his position in desperance, could not get the crime off his mind and the  more  he  thought  about  it,  the  more  he  could  see  himself becoming twisted up in a knot about having to explain what had happened  to  the  assembled  people.  The  way  they  kept  sitting around outside the Council office examining him from a distance with  stern-looking  faces,  he  thought  they  must  have  thought  he had committed the murder. So, not knowing what might happen if he stopped, he kept on ringing the bell. It looked as though the whole town had arrived to watch his baby  blue  eyes  staring  abstractly  into  space.  His  tubby  body slithered up and down with the rope, pulling and sweating, as though  he  had  been  ringing  that  bell  forever.  He  looked straight  through  the  bewildered  assembly  who  watched  him very carefully, while they tried to determine if he had lost his marbles.  No  one  felt  anyone  had  the  right  to  interfere  with  a man’s job, particularly someone they had only known for about eight years, so they sat and watched and waited, determined to let him go on ringing, at least until the law arrived. Looking past reality, Valance saw another landscape transposed on his mind, a perfect world he had temporarily created, although it did happen. The hinterland people were saying, ‘Yes sir, listen to the  bell,  the  angelus  bell,  Angelus domini,’  and  walking  like pilgrims,  like  the  holy  folk  would,  coming  into  town.  His  efforts were  especially  for  the  town  camp  brethren,  calling  on  the  Holy Trinity  in  the  storm  clouds  above  by  ringing  the  bell,  hoping  his Gods  would  look  down  on  those  poor  unfortunates  and  shower them with the strength to walk to town. Praise men of ambition who strive for newfangled ideas like reconciliation  in  old  Australia,  for  Valance  with  his  pricked conscience  used  every  opportunity  as  town  clerk,  to  make  town campers  feel  like  they  were  a  part  of  the  broader  community. even though Gordie was not their neighbourhood watch, Valance considered  the  community  service  was  available  for  all  folks.  Yet, the longer the bell rang, the more people on both sides of the old Pricklebush  wars  were  declaring  from  their  respective  sides  of town, how they were going to destroy that bell once and for all one day, as soon as they got the chance. In the end there was great relief to hear Bruiser and Truthful had  arrived.  They  heard  Bruiser’s  mango-green  reconditioned Valiant’s powerful engine groaning up along the patch of bitumen road  outside  the  Shire  Council  office  like  some  kind  of  suffering mud creature, until it gave up the ghost on the footpath outside the Council lawns. Bruiser, Levi’s-jeaned and check-shirted, looked hot under  the  collar  when  he  got  out  of  the  car.  He  surveyed  the assembled crowd with a quick glance to see who was missing. It did not take long before the bell was silenced. Bruiser quickly donned the mantle of his Lordship the Mayor, and with a few great strides in his moccasins, went straight across to Valance and squeezed the town clerk’s wrists until they cracked. Shocked by the pain, Valance immediately came out of his trance. ‘He won’t be doing that again for a while, let’s hope,’ Bruiser said. ‘My mate here,’ Bruiser said, patting Truthful on the shoulder. ‘He knows what to do, and he will be doing it directly, straight after this  meeting  is  finished.  There  will  be  no  mucking  about  getting the  cops  up  from  down  South.  We  got  our  own  policeman  right here,  who  knows  us,  knows  what  we  want,  and  knows  this  town doesn’t want to be mucked about. Not like in the past, about all of them unsolved deaths around the bush here. ‘ What  did  those  police  that  they  sent  up  from  down  South somewhere, know what to do? They don’t know us. did they look like they knew us, or were even bothered to ask us what we think, and we live here all the time? No, they just went around wasting taxpayers’  money,  made  a  right  monkey  of  themselves,  and whoosh!  Where  did  they  go?  We  looked  around  and  found ourselves  sitting  here  like  we  always  have  because?  Because  we belong here. ‘ They had gone off, no goodbyes, thanks for the hospitality or anything. They just got back into their chartered planes, and flew off, and that was the last we heard of them. And what did we get out of it? Sleepless nights wondering if we’s going to be murdered in  our  own  beds,  wondering  if  we  are  going  to  wake  up  in  the morning, or whether we might be dead. You right mate? A penny for them?’ Bruiser turned to check on Valance. There were coughs and silly grins in the audience. ‘We found the evidence, darn right we did,’ Bruiser continued, pausing to slap Truthful on the shoulder again. Truthful nodded. Valance  looked  up  from  his  seat  with  interest.  The  townsfolk sighed  relief.  ‘Poor  old  Gordie  and  his  wretched  soul,  parts  of which would be being digested by camp dogs but for the strangest coincidence,’ Bruiser rattled on as though talking about a normal day, flicking the switch occasionally for good measure, to throw in a bit of the fanciful the locals loved to hear. ‘But you know what? There  were  rainbows  appearing  across  the  sky  through  the clouds.’ Something miraculous seemed to have happened, because one  of  the  rainbows  actually  ended  directly  over  the  spot  where they  had  found  Gordie. even  Bruiser  took  on  an  angelic  face when he pointed out the phenomenon. The crowd turned around, craning their necks to look in the direction Bruiser was pointing, looking over the roofs of houses, to the outskirts of town, amongst the  ruby  saltbush  on  the  side  of  the  muddy  track.  Multiple rainbows were fairly common in the wide skies of the flat lands. ‘See! Gordie  was  going  straight  to  heaven.  God  sent  him  a rainbow to walk on for only God knows where desperance is. You know where the good folk live, don’t you Lord? But for God’s sake! What! Listen! There was more to it. God was telling me what to do, God  was  telling  me  he  will  punish  the  wicked.  Thank  you  Lord, I  said, but we already know who did it Lord. We know for sure, and we will make sure they don’t get away with it. So after we finish talking,  we  are  going  to  go  straight  there  and  arrest  the  little buggers.  Well!  Goodbye  then,  Gordie  ya  big  long  streak,  we  will always remember you. Pray for us Gordie.’ At this point Bruiser, sticking to his script, shut his mouth. He looked  into  the  crowd  with  feigned  innocence  on  his  face.  He searched  the  eyes  for  non-believers  of  the  Christian  faith.  There had  to  be  someone.  Where?  Where?  Who  was  it  going  to  be  this time? Instead, to Valance’s astonishment, people started babbling all of their hidden prayers, praying loudly for Gordie. And Bruiser, whose  scarred  face  usually  gave  him  the  impression  of  being  a descendant from aliens, now looked different too. Valance was at a loss to understand what he had done to his face. He began to see what others were already seeing; it was like looking at a holy man. ‘Hush now  folks,’  Bruiser  finally  spoke,  repeating  his  request over and over, until he regained the full attention of the meeting. ‘Save your prayers for later folks, we have got a lotta hard work to do  here  first.  First,  we  need  to  get  organised  with  putting  some men  together,  because  we  are  going  to  arrest  those  little  petrol sniffers who did this to Gordie, too right we are. Whose names we 3ot coming now?’ The air bristled.  everyone knew what Bruiser was referring to. It was plain easy to reminisce the kind of yesterday antics of Will Phantom:  arsonist,  stirrer,  troublemaker,  cars  running  up  and down the street in the middle of the night. So much trouble, fights and what have you, all because one person kept telling the world he did not want the mine to be built. The very building they were sitting in front of, the beautiful new Council offices, had replaced the  one  they  all  reckoned  he  burnt  down.  Someone  had  to  have done  it.  It  could  not  have  burnt  down  by  itself.  Happily  for everyone,  the  good  neighbour  mine  came  to  the  rescue.  It honoured  its  word:  said  it  was  going  to  donate  a  brand-new building when it got the green light on Native title problems. They had Will Phantom to blame for that too. Well! It looked as though something like that was stirring its ugly head about race relations again. ‘Ya gotta nip it in the bud this time, ya hear me, ya honour?’ ‘We  aren’t  gonna  put  up  with  that  same  trouble.  Turning everyone inside out.’ ‘No,’ Bruiser was the first to agree. ‘Just like I said. We will do it differently this time, won’t we?’ everyone knew of those little petrol sniffers living in fortresses of  abandoned  car  bodies.  The  window  smashers.  There  was  a whole group of them moving from one car body to another. Just recently, some had moved to a car abandoned by the Fishman mob lying right next to the path that Gordie used. It had been stripped down to nothing. They were the ones who spray-painted graffiti on tin fences around town,  Petrol Sniffers  Don’t  Die . You just had to read it and say – Who were they  kidding?  everybody knew who they were. They knew because the boys had broken into their properties and stolen things and nothing happened to stop it. They knew because petrol had been taken out of their cars on such a regular basis, big, fat  padlocks  had  to  be  welded  onto  the  petrol  tanks,  because nothing  was  done  to  stop  it.  The  whole  town  had  to  become fastidious  about  locking  up:  car  doors,  doors  to  their  houses, everything  of  value  locked  up  for  security  against  petrol  sniffers, and still nothing was done about it. everyone had seen these boys walking about town, speeded up on  petrol  fumes  and  looking  like  zombies,  walking  straight  past people as though they did not exist, sometimes with their little girls in tow, initiated by older boys on petrol as well. disgusting skin and bone creatures who looked like nobody fed them. or was it right like  Valance  kept  saying:  petrol  was  the  only  thing  that  kept  the hunger away? ‘How did you know it was them?’ Valance asked, still nursing his wrists, wading against the tide. Bruiser , whose motto had always been hit first, talk later , glared at  Valance,  hoping  he  would  get  the  message  to  shut  his  bloody mouth up. If only Valance had been a drinking man, Bruiser had always  thought,  once  again  regretting  the  Council’s  choice  of recruiting another Southerner to the job. Two minutes in town and he  had  something  to  say  about  everything.  The  man  had  been driving  him  crazy  ever  since. down  the  pub  it  would  have  been different. He would have settled the matter of a man like Valance wanting  to  be  a  control  freak,  quick  smart,  and  afterwards,  he would be broken in about how to get things done in the Gulf. He regretted not having broken his bloody hand or bashed his teeth in:  one  thing  or  the  other.  He  reminded  himself  to  do  the  latter first opportunity, but not now. This was a delicate matter, except, if Valance  pushed  too  far,  Bruiser  wondered  whether  he  would  be able to stop himself. ‘How come we know? What are you saying Valance? How do you think we go about making accusations? I’ll tell you something Valance, and listen good because I am not going to repeat myself about this stuff. This is not a Council meeting Valance, where we are  sitting  around  on  our  arses  pushing  paper  about  like  we  got nothing better to do with our time. ‘ This is about real people who get out there and they get the job done. Maybe some people need to get out of their air-conditioned offices once in a while. Like the rest of us in the heat of the day. But hey! Wait a minute. Valance, are you trying to tell me something like  I  think  you  are  thinking:  that  I  am  making  little  fibs  to  tell people?  You  think  people  are  stupid  or  something?  If  you  are accusing me, you better get out with it Valance. Let’s stop beating around  the  bush  because  I  will  tell  you  something,  I  haven’t  got time for frigging around. You know what I should be doing right now? Getting a thousand head of cattle to ship to Asia by Tuesday. I’ve got no time on my hands I can tell you, to sit around pondering, who bloody did it.’ The townsfolk were in awe about the enormity of Bruiser’s life. ‘Man!  A  thousand  head  of  cattle.  Those  cattle  on  the  road  now, Bruiser?’ Valance interrupted: a nervous response which had momentarily overtaken him. ‘No! How do you know it was them? That’s all I am asking.’ ‘ Tell him, Bruiser. He’s got a right to know, I suppose,’ another voice strung out of the meeting. The silence of consensus followed, and  chastened  Bruiser  who  continued  directing  his  speech  to Valance, in a tone which suggested he was talking to an idiot. ‘ one  of  them  little  black  bastards  left  his  red  thong  behind right there on the spot, that’s what, and whoever it fits, or who  ever we find walking around with only one thong on his feet – Well! You work it out. Number two. Another one left his cap behind. He was in such a hurry, rushing off, and it don’t belong to anyone either because it belongs to one of Mozzie’s boys. It’s got the kid’s name written on it. What a shame the father don’t stay around town and be a real father for a change. That’s the proof of it and we found another  thong  left  behind  as  well.  Well!  We  not  going  to  wait around  for  the  CIB,  or  any  other  Southern  copper  to  come  up here and fail his duty to this town, like last time when that smartarse Will Phantom ran amok, remember that? Burnt down half the bloody town and got away with it. Lack of evidence still makes my blood boil: Lack of evidence. Bullshit.’ Trailing  off  his  speech  by  making  a  fist  into  his  open  palm, Bruiser  felt  he  had  said  everything  that  needed  to  be  said,  and looked across at Truthful standing beside him for support. The  crowd  grew  noisier.  Neighbours  spoke  to  one  another across  the  rows  of  plastic  chairs  in  approving  terms  of  Bruiser’s no-nonsense  course  of  action.  All  of  the  men  and  their  big  boys volunteered  to  spend  the  rest  of  the  day  hunting  down  every petrol sniffer in sight. Bruiser was quick to rein in the stampede for the man-hunt. ‘Whoa, hold on boys. We got to get a grip on this thing first, hold your horses, hang tight to your seats there for a minute. The Constable here has to do some checking first off. Go for it Constable e ’ Strange.’ ‘ Alright!  Alright!  Settle  down  everybody,’  Truthful  took  over. ‘We all know a very serious crime has been committed and we have to make sure we follow the letter of the law because I don’t want to  fill  the  jail  up  with  the  wrong  people,  and  I  don’t  want  to  be arresting you folk because you are upset neither. We, you and I: it is our responsibility to see justice is done and done correctly. So, let’s be calm now. ‘First off,  we  are  only  after  three  boys  at  the  moment,  there could have been more, but we got to go by the evidence, and we got the evidence like the Mayor just told you. We know who we got to go and find, young Tristrum Fishman and his brother Luke.’ Voices in the crowd interrupted Truthful, calling out that these kids should have been hung, drawn and quartered a long time ago. For two little boys, they certainly had a bad reputation in uptown. Someone speaking loudly, told Truthful to fix the little bastards this time. one woman added her voice to civic duty: ‘This time lock the little mongrels up so they can never get out, and throw away the key while you are at it.’ All that said, Truthful continued. This part troubled him. ‘The other boy we have to find is,’ stopping mid-sentence to take a deep breath,  before  he  said  the  name,  ‘Aaron  Ho kum.’ That  raised  a few  eyebrows,  and  complete  silence.  Nobody  wanted  to  call  out about the parents now, like they were doing a minute ago. A penny for your thoughts now, big, righteous uptown. e very person sitting there knew who these boys were, even if they were not  considered  the  property  of  the  town  itself.  Hinterland,  edge people was where the petrol sniffers came from. From the camps somewhere where the blackfellas lived, because you do not get this kind of trouble from the sons of uptown, except… except there was a  question  mark  on  Aaron  Ho kum. Those  two  Fishman  boys belonged to Mrs Angel day. She goes and has them one after the other,  after  she  leaves  her  real  family  high  and  dry  to  fend  for themselves in the Pricklebush. oh! Yes, she was the one, everyone knew her: a real tart. And where was she today ? i  say she’s lying flat on her back hmm! hmm! legs spread doing you know what.  Too busy to spare a few minutes to come down to the Council  lawns like everybody else and get involved with civic duty.  ‘She don’t look after them boys does she?’ the white lady folk were whispering loudly to one another, ‘No, she can’t be bothered. She just lets them run loose.’ No one looked in the direction of the barman, Lloydie Smith. everyone knew he was the so-called father of Aaron Ho kum, even though  he  had  never  publicly  acknowledged  the  mother.  Well! radar was  what  radar  was.  There  had  been  talk  when  that  child was born. everyone had been dead keen to have a gander at it, to see if it was white, and she had only been half a kid herself at the time.  The  scandal  of  it,  no  one  thought  having  a  baby  to  the barman would mean she was destined to live uptown. When that turned out to be the case, she just wrapped that kid up, summer time and all, so nobody could see it. Nevertheless, black was black. No living person could change the colour of skin. When the white father had never even bothered claiming his coloured child, even though everyone else was saying it was his, she made a horrific vow. Just as she said, she never ever went  to uptown  again.  Some  say,  it  was  because  of  the  vicious rumours, that the poor woman decided to live cooped up in a little dark room with the door shut and locked. Her brother claimed she made her stand, her skin eventually turned white, just like a white woman’s.  Now,  he  claimed,  she  was  scared  of  what  people  would say.  She  was  too  proud  to  come  out  and  face  the  music  after  all these years, and why should she, the wise brother said, explaining: ‘The world goes round and round, and it was not going to change one little bit for one moment in her lifetime, or anyone else’s who’s black around desperance as a matter of fact.’ Never a  flash  man,  he  spoke  plain  about  what  other  people only  liked  to  think.  Miscegenation  was  the  word,  he  said,  for interbreeding: ‘was treated as though good white sperm had been falsely  procured  by  a  lesser  kind  and  produced  a  snake . ’  The woman’s  brother  looked  after  everything  the  best  he  knew  how, including being a father and a mother, right from birth, to the little troublemaker  Aaron. everyone  knew  he  did  everything,  while trying  to  mind  a  herd  of  goats  he  kept  on  a  high  block,  south  of town.  He  now  had  two  hundred  goats,  all  kinds  and  colours interbred from building on fifty years of goats, living on the very same spot. Whenever the wind turned, and ran from the south, the pungent  stench  vaporising  out  of  that  piece  of  ground  stank  the town out. The goats’ wind it was called. The wind with no wife. The uncle  worked  hard  because  of  the  goats,  fed  his  family,  fed  the goats, milked  the  goats,  made  the  town’s  cheese,  and  bought freezers to store his product when the Town Council provided him with a power line. It prided uptown to see Aaron Ho kum’s uncle do well with a hard life. It pleased them to watch the goat shepherd walking on foot, in weather fair or fraught, tending his flock. only thing  though,  and  it  troubled uptown,  for  they  could  not  help thinking that Aaron was funny sort of material to be mixing up in the gene pool and all. There were a lot of theories, but no answer. All the  country  mob  in  the  Pricklebush  were  shaking  their heads  disbelievingly,  when  they  heard  about  what  happened. up and  down  the  Pricklebush,  you  could  see  people  going  along  to each  other’s  place,  and  asking:  ‘You  know  why  those  three  little petrol  sniffers  would  want  to  kill  Gordie  in  the  middle  of  the night?’ It was a million-dollar question. The three boys were asleep when Truthful and Bruiser found them.  They  were  lying  side  by  side,  just  like  they  were  sardines squashed in a rusty shell, and this was what they might have looked like, when they were found inside the upside-down Holden sedan they called home. The car body was jammed into a camouflage of dense thickets of pricklebush. The dehydrated boys, awoken when dragged out of the car body by the neck, were vaguely aware in a déjà vu kind of way, that something bad was happening to them. Had  they  escaped  one  net  and  fallen  straight  into  another? only yesterday,  members  of  the  Fishman’s  convoy  had  unsuccessfully scoured  the  whole  countryside  around desperance  searching  for those naughty boys. Angel day  told  Mozzie  the  boys  did  not  live  with  her,  they moved  around  with  relatives.  She  hardly  saw  them  and  that  was true. Those  up-to-no-good boys hid here and hid there, even though they knew their old daddy was looking for them. They knew how to  dissolve  into  thin  air,  being  nothing  more  than  skin  and  bone kids. one minute they were seen, and the next minute they were gone. each could have been a blade of grass, or a little prickly bush, they knew how to do it. W hen the convoy left town, those cheeky boys came out from hiding,  jubilant  smiles  running  across  their  faces.  ‘You  are  in charge  Tristram.’  ‘You  the  power.’  ‘No  you  the  destroyer  man Aaron.’ ‘You are.’ ‘You are.’  Tumbling  through  fairyland,  their voices rang through the grasslands, and this was young hope, the place where optimism should dwell. Finally, sitting on the roof of the old car body, feeling safe, they watched the exodus of dust heading  down  the  south  road.  The  last  thing  they  wanted  was discipline.  Being  on  the  road  for  months  and  months  with Mozzie Fishman’s convoy was not likely to be any picnic. He had warned them: ‘Break ya leg first with a bit of wood if I ever catch ya  sniffing  petrol.’  They  had  heard  all  about  the  Fishman’s reform agenda for petrol sniffers. It was unfortunate for them that they were incoherently high on  petrol,  glue,  metho,  or  whatever  cocktail  had  been  their  last meal, when Truthful and Bruiser found them. Neither of the three had  any  idea  what  was  happening  to  them  when  the  two  men threw them into the back seat of the lime-green car and sped over to the jail building. They were dragged inside the premises of the lockup,  through  to  the  back,  into  the  walled  exercise  yard,  and thrown  around  the  walled  space  as  though  they  were  sacks  of potatoes.  Like  potatoes,  the  boys  just  hit  the  floor  and  stayed where they fell. Manhandling was  proving  to  be  a  pretty  fruitless  exercise,  as Truthful was quick to discover. He suddenly stopped throwing the boys  around.  A  cop  had  to  remember  his  duty.  Truthful  noticed how abstract their blood looked, as it dripped down from the clean walls and onto the clean concrete floor. A sickening image of cattle being  slaughtered  flashed  across  his  mind,  and  the  first  thing  he understood was, he would have to clean up. With a mind trained for  recording  detail,  he  remembered  the  detainees  were  semicomatose when apprehended. This fact would be written into his formal  report.  Now,  he  finds,  they  are  starting  to  look  as  though they had been put through a mincing machine. even  Truthful  knew  this  was  a  dumb  move.  ‘Hey!  Come  on Bruse, this is not getting us anywhere.’ He noticed the panic in his voice. If! If! imprinted on his consciousness like a highway poster. If there was a death in Custody. He knew the sucker who would take the rap for it. But not if he could help it, he was not going to be the fall guy. It would be Bruiser’s word against his. Quickly the pennies  fell,  all  saying,  someone  needs  to  be  smart.  He  realised there wouldn’t be one politician, or bureaucrat connected with the State  government,  who  would  be  game  enough  to  challenge  the influential  Bruiser,  Mayor  of desperance  in  the  woop  woop,  and get  away  with  it.  ‘Constable,’  he  told  himself  smartly,  ‘you  are  on your own.’ The policeman watched helplessly as Bruiser hauled up one of the boys, holding him at face level, while his spit sprayed into the boy’s face as he spoke. ‘Where were  you  last  night,  you  little  piece  of  shit?’  Bruiser demanded, his scarred face set like concrete, sweat running down from his hairy skull, over his lumpy forehead, and onto his exposed brown teeth, baring now like those of a savage dog. The boy looked dully at the man through his hooded eyelids, incapable, it crossed Truthful’s  mind,  of  even  opening  his  eyes  in  fright.  The  lack  of response  from  the  boy  did  not  lessen  the  sport,  because  Bruiser read the situation as meaning only one thing, contempt. ‘You don’t want to tell me, and if you don’t tell me, you make me  mad,  and  you  know  what’s  going  to  happen  if  you  make  me mad?’ He looked into the boy’s face, which was only inches away from  his  own,  and  found  it  was  blank.  So,  with  his  other  hand rolled into a fist, he rammed it into the boy’s stomach and sent him flying. Truthful saw the boy land, slammed into the far wall, where he fell into a crumpled heap. ‘Shit! Bruiser. enough, before you go too far.’ The big man was lost in a frenzy. His huge frame stomped from one end of the small exercise yard to the other, while kicking and dragging up one limp sack and throwing it against the wall, then picking  up  another  and  throwing  it,  and  another.  This  struck Truthful  in  an  oblique  kind  of  way  as  overwhelming  reverence towards  the  search  for  truth,  to  the  point  that  it  meant  killing everyone in the increasingly bloodied yard to find it. Truthful tried to drag Bruiser outside, but the older man was bigger, and stronger in his new-found strength. ‘Let’s go mate and see if we can round up the parents. Who knows? Maybe they can give us a clue about what happened,’ he said, trying in a last ditch vain attempt to place himself in front of Bruiser who was ducking and weaving to get past. ‘Stop it! Stop it! You want to be up on a murder charge?’ Truthful yelled at him. Bruiser could scarcely believe his ears. Was he hearing things? Who was going to be on the murder charge around here?’ Thump! Crash! Another kid went flying past the cop. At this point, Truthful lost his temper. The idyllic country cop was dismissed with a click of  the  fingers,  and  the  Valley  cop  re-emerged  like  a  circus  trick. Here  was  the  set  face  of  law  and  justice  in  a  city  alley  after midnight.  It  belonged  to  a  cop  who  did  whatever  it  took  to survive rort and corruption. He drew his gun. A shot went into the  sky.  The  whole  town  must  have  heard  it.  The  clouds  paid back  with  thunder.  He  pointed  the  gun  straight  at  Bruiser’s face, stood firm, following Bruiser’s movements. ‘Fucking stop fuckhead,  or  I’ll  fucking  use  it.’  Bruiser  looked  at  him  for  a moment, noticing the finger firmly over the trigger, and laughed. ‘Bloody Mafia,’ Bruiser blurted out over his laughter, having been reminded of scenes from The Godfather i  or ii , it did not matter, it was what he thought. ‘Has anyone ever told you you look like the son of a Sicilian Mafia leader?’ Truthful kept his aim with his eye fixed on the target. ‘ Well! okay. If you want to shoot me, then, come on, shoot me  here,’  Bruiser  pointed  to  his  forehead.  ‘Then  look  at  them murdering  scum  and  shoot  them,  put  them  out  of  their  misery the dogs, you idiot!’ The moment  passed  and  the  cop  put  his  gun  away.  He  felt defeated. He was angry with himself now. only a junior cop would go around pulling his gun like a cowboy. one stupid decision and he  knew  he  had  lost  all  the  credibility  he  had  earned,  cultivated over years, to become Bruiser’s mate. Now, except for the sound of rain falling and thunder from a nearby storm, there was silence in the human corral. The cop dragged each of the boys inside to the cell  and  locked  them  in.  Bruiser  dusted  dirt  off  himself,  and washed  his  hands  at  the  wash  basin  in  the  office,  then  stalked outside to wait in the car. They drove around town through heavy rain and mud, wheels spinning in the wet clay, engine smoking, skirting the mud larks. Bruiser did not seem to care anymore about the condition of the car: forgetting how he had considered it was sacrilegious if anyone laid a finger on the shiny new paint work. To the passing stares, he sneered, ‘Wave. Captains of society wave. So wave and show some respect, even if they didn’t teach you those things where you come from.’ They arrived at Angel day’s uptown house first. Her house was a little grey fibro job. Nondescript really, with cracked and broken fibro  louvres,  sad  and  sorry  walls.  The  lot  thrown  together sometime in the sixties on a cement slab in a big empty yard. It had one  saving  grace.  An  address  that  somehow  stoked  the  fires  of passion in even the hardiest of hearts, as they passed by. A house which showered cupid’s arrows on sweethearts it was thought, by those  who  believed  it  had  happened  to  them,  because  of  the house.  A  house  infectious  with  burning  lust  which  inspired forbidden  imaginings  in  passing  lovers. dogs  and  cats  on  heat stopped by each evening to mate in the yard. Which goes to show, that love knoweth no obstacle, and does not discriminate. This was  the  house  of  the  long  hot  summer  night.  Mozzie Fishman had bought it for a song, when Angel had abandoned her plain old life for another; ‘simply,’ she explained, ‘to lose myself and come alive again in hot, humid caresses, for love’s sake, for the last third of my life at least.’ The wish was granted. With the lights out,  it  could  have  been  a  shrine  of  love  from  another  time  or another  place,  equal  to  the  greatest  loves  of  all  times,  even  the Valley of the Nile, for sometimes after the devil’s dancing hour, it became so inflamed, it floated, and he could have been the Mark Antony of men, and she, the Cleopatra of women. So far from the truth. In this house, Angel day spent numerous months  alone  with  her  two  new  sons,  to  sing  the  lonely  person’s lullaby, Send me the pillow that you dream on, so, darling, i  can dream on it too . during Mozzie’s many flights of absence, she claimed to any audience whatsoever, the loneliness had caused her to collapse into temporary  insanity.  If  the  imagination  could  stretch  the  truth, then, it was just as Angel day claimed, when she said: ‘It was the house that sullied the mind of all who looked at it.’ This was why she too thought it was a house of miracles. For goodness’ sake, from it materialised the birth of two boys at her age, and he, an old man. This twice lucky phenomenon, the whole town marvelled at, as though  it  had  been  lust  that  did  these  things,  but  Angel day said sadly, as far as she knew, it was both times an immaculate conception. That Angel day, she had no shame, and she gave those two  boys  the  Fishman’s  name,  even  though  they  were  not  even married. As a matter of fact, in that very house it was rumoured she had loosened herself, by lying about in others’ arms during her lonely moments.  With  bated  breath,  the  town  hung  in  suspense  for Mozzie’s  return  whispering, Well!  The  truth  will  come  out  now .  But the miracle of Mozzie Fishman was that he forgave her from the bottom of his heart, every time. From  across  the  road,  people  heard  Bruiser’s  car  pull  up. dolly  Parton  was  singing  loudly  on  the  radio, God  doesn’t  make honky tonk women . Along the rooftop sat a line of seagulls looking down, staring at Bruiser and Truthful with beady eyes. Both men walked through the gap where the gate had been, in readiness to accost Angel day, and arrest her too. What for? Neglect. The birds flew off, swooping low over the yard, just as they had done earlier, when they had flown over the exercise yard at the jail. of  course  Angel day  was  not  at  home.  The  big  statue  of  the Aboriginal  Virgin  Mary  had  been  left  in  charge.  It  stood  in  the sparse lounge room amidst a mass of plastic flowers, as if to watch over the birds that pecked each other on the roof, and the house’s proportion  of  the  Gulf  country’s  croaking  frogs  that  sprung  into silence in the grass outside as soon as they heard noise. Truthful  said  he  thought  the  house  looked  like  a  shrine  or  a grotto, which was very strange, because he did not think she was a religious person. Statues were the kind of thing his Mother had in her house. If they had come when she was home, they would have known she had left behind in those silent walls, a barrage of abuse to the petrol-sniffing sons who hid themselves from her, every time she  wanted  them  to  do  something.  The  statue  dominated  the house, and the eeriness for them felt too serene in its total silence. It was as though someone had died. The  atmosphere of religious piety felt disconcerting, so, being thorough,  in  case  of  some  deception,  some  trick  of  the  eye,  they broke  the  house.  Nothing  would  be  preserved  of  the  quaint architecture  for  the  town’s  posterity.  In  the  shadowy  walls,  the ghosts of rosaries watched, while the two men worked desperately hard  to  destroy  its  incomprehensible  meaning,  its  contents,  its beliefs. The ramshackle house remained silently serene as the yard frogs  approached,  when  the  two  men  left. one  by  one  the  green creatures  came  inside,  and  so  did  the  birds,  hopping  up  to  the open front door, deciding to move in, rebuilding the life of the love nest. ‘ Nothing doing,’ that was the size of the thing, the two men agreed.  Again,  they  walked  around  the  rusty  Holden  car  body, searching  for  clues.  The  day  was  almost  over,  and  there  was nothing left of it with the disappearing daylight, except to go down to the pub at sunset, where the usual group of men hung about. There was not much that they did not know about the politics of the State, thanks to Bruiser. He swung around on his revolving bar stool,  giving  the  very  latest  news  about  the  legislation  going through  Parliament,  the  particular  failings  of  the  legislation,  and how, yet again, nobody ever took any notice of his advice. The men talked about the mine down the road. They discussed how  the  ore  body  was  shaping  up  in  the  latest  chemical  analysis. They  talked  about  which  part  of  the  huge  open  cut  was  being operated on, how low the underground shaft would go before the mineral vein petered out. The extraction methods tailor-designed for the vein. The never-ending problems of pumping surface water from  the  pit,  and  the  ground  water  tests.  Could  the  aquifers  be drying up? The talk could go into hours of general analysis, right through to the functioning of hundreds of kilometres of pipeline, the  dewatering  of  the  ore  on  the  flood-prone  coastline,  and  the barges operating with near mishaps while transferring the ore onto the big foreign tankers, which were a sight to see off the coastline. This was the talk of work. This, and talk about herds of cattle and  the  slump  in  prices,  other  people’s  horses,  whose  broken fences  were  needing  a  blow  by  blow  description  of  repairs  and maintenance.  Then,  once  a  man  was  talking  about  his  outdoor work,  he  got  around  to  speaking  about  the  mysteries  of  the min-min light and who saw it where. How long it followed the car. How spooky was that? or, in october, the morning glories crossing the skies. Money and wives were two subjects of discussion that made the dozen  beady-eyed  men  look  depressively  at  the  comfortable  pub decor  of  stuffed  baby  crocodiles  crawling  up  the  wall,  and  the tanned  skin  of  the  biggest  croc  ever  caught.  These  were  two  of Norm’s special works of local fish mounted and displayed proudly on  the  walls. elsewhere,  the  walls  were  stuffed  with  autographed stubby holders, or pinned with nude pictures of women. From the ceiling  hung  dusty  flytraps  that  flew  about  in  the  breeze  of  the overhead  fans  in  front  of  the  glass-fronted  fridges  holding  fine wines and red, green, white and yellow cans of beer. on the jukebox, droning country and western music occasionally seduced  eyes  to  look  yonder,  through  the  little  window  slot  that separated  the  Barramundi  bar  from  the  ugly,  stained,  mustardcoloured walls of the snake pit next door, which was crowded to overflowing with ‘the darkies’. As they talked, the Barramundi bar drinkers observed the young men from the Pricklebush around the snooker  table  in  a  play-off.  They  had  a  good  squiz  at  the  dressy black women sitting around the plastic tables laughing as if there was no tomorrow. They placed bets on the frequent drunken fights that went on and on until the defeated ended up lying motionless on the ground outside. Silences led to the usual daydreams of fish, then the talk resumed of fishing and boats, and all kinds of roads, rivers and ocean tracks which led them to fish.  Young kevin Phantom was not welcome at the snooker table as he swung in and out through the lads standing around playing the game. All the bigger and stronger boys in T-shirts and jeans took appearance  and  life  seriously,  while  standing  beside  the  snooker table. They said to kevin, ‘This is a serious game.’ kevin had had more  than  enough  to  drink  simply  by  persuading  people  to  pity him because he had no money. A few of the lads gave him their own half-drunk cans, and went and bought themselves a fresh one. He was given sips, as he worked his way around the room, just through speaking  loudly  into  anyone’s  ear,  and  pestering  until  someone gave him some. After a few hours, nobody wanted him around, and someone went over to the bar to ask Lloydie Smith, the barman, to get him out of the place. ‘Hey! Lloydie,  come  over  here.  I  want  to  talk  to  you,’  the woman called out, but the barman had his back to her. All  eyes  from  around  the  plastic  tables  were  looking  towards the window where the woman kept calling, and waiting for Lloydie to hear her. The more she got into the rhythm, she made a game of  calling  out  ‘Lloydie’,  then  standing  aside  to  wink  back  to  the tables,  motioning  with  her  lips  ‘have  a  look’,  and  rubbing  her backside  with  one  hand. everyone  started  looking.  Their  eyes, drawn  through  the  window  slot,  peered  across  the  bar  to  where Lloydie was standing, then the nudging began, eyes lighting up in merriment, ‘ oh ! Look! He is doing it again.’ They saw  Lloydie  Smith  wiping  down  the  bar  that  was  made from grey-brown planks salvaged locally from an ancient shipwreck. He worked with a wet cloth that was impregnated with spilt beer, and  he  worked  on  the  wood  carefully,  in  rhythmical  motions,  as though  he  were  caressing  a  woman’s  skin.  Truthful  watched  his hands  at  work,  fastidiously  cleaning,  smoothing,  fussing  as  he always  did.  Already  he  felt  in  the  mood  to  see  Girlie.  He  left Bruiser, who noticed nothing, to do the talking. ‘W ell! Lloyd, what about it then, that son of yours?’ Bruiser never cut corners with his bluntness. ‘I burnt my bridges there years ago and you know it, so it’s got nothing to do with me,’ Lloydie replied in his short tone of voice. ‘You want to come down and help us ask him what happened, you might be able to get it out of the little bugger?’ ‘Nope! Nothing to do with me.’ ‘We’ll ask his mother then, if we can get her to talk.’ Lloydie happened to know her brother, the goat man, had had it up to the eyeballs with Aaron, and had said he would kill the little bugger the next time he saw him. And she, if you looked in the  cupboard  with  a  torch,  all  you  would  see  was  a  black  woman with white skin, who spoke even less than the spirit of the beautiful fish woman, locked inside the timber planks of the bar. He felt her body responding to the soft touch of his hand. Moving her silvery body  further  towards  him  with  every  movement  he  made.  When he looked at the wood he saw the outline of her body luxuriously posed  and  hungry  for  touching.  It  was  fascinating  to  him  that nobody else saw her moving her body around at him through the wood. He could hardly believe that she only had eyes for him, as though they were always alone. She was the she-fish, who had come alive from his erotic dreams, that had seemed so lifelike that he had now taken up the habit of sleeping on the top of the bar at night. ‘Go ahead,’  Lloydie  said,  more  or  less  oblivious  to  Bruiser’s enticing. ‘Talk to the brother, maybe he can help you.’ By the  time  Lloydie  had  finished  talking  to  Bruiser,  and responded to the inebriated woman screaming out to him from the bar next door, kevin Phantom had disappeared. ‘ Where  are  you  going?’  a  male  voice  wafted  out  of  the  car window on the passenger side, as a vehicle slowed down next to kevin walking along the footpath in the rain.  ‘Yu wanta lift kevin?’ the voice continued, but kevin kept on walking,  hardly  aware  of  the  car.  He  was  thinking,  wondering where his father had gone and when he was coming back. ‘He should’na left me,’ kevin said, continuing to walk, as the car purred, moving slowly along beside him. ‘ We would’na leave you, come on, and we’ll have some fun without  him,’  the  voice  hummed  in  tune  to  the  car’s  motor turning over. ‘You got a party going then?’ kevin asked, opening the door of the car and jumping in. ‘ Yeah! You’re the party coon boy,’ the voice snapped, and the car roared off along the sealed road, did a wheelie down the end, roared  back  past  the  pub,  turning  there  at  high  speed,  tyres screeching.  But  it  bothered  no  one.  Truthful  and  Lloydie  were outside the pub armed with batons, fighting some of the men who had  been  attacking  each  other  with  broken  beer  bottles  in  the mustard bar. ‘Clear the whole place out, I have had enough of the buggers,’ Lloydie ordered Truthful, as the car swung around the corner. It was action night, the whole place, except the main bar where the dozen men drank, was to be cleared. The car headed off along the bitumen stretch going south of town. All kevin could see were the white  hoods  each  of  the  people  in  the  car  had  placed  over  their heads. Then he felt the hands of someone in the back seat pushing something over his head. He reached up and felt the rough thread of the material, like a sack, and he could smell wheat or flour, like poultry feed. He knew the smell, recognising it from when he had passed uptown  people’s  backyard  fowl  coops.  You  could  smell  it from the street if you were passing by some houses. kevin knew he had to get out of the car, but he feared the consequences of jumping out, as it headed along the bitumen at high speed. Struggling, he twisted around in his seat until he felt the handle of the car door but realised it was locked. He reached for the lock but felt the knife gliding along his neck being pressed deeply  into  his  flesh.  There  were  several  voices  in  the  car,  all talking to him at the same time. ‘Take this for Gordie,’ fists flew at  him  from  the  front  and  from  the  back.  He  started  to  panic, and  in  his  panic,  felt  spasms  running  through  him. kevin  had moved into another world, when suddenly the car stopped, and he was tipped out onto the ground. Someone said,  ‘Great.’  He  had  found  the  cricket  bats  in  the boot. kevin slipped in and out of believing it was not happening to him, hearing war cries, laughter, and smelling beer and rum. He tried to rip the sack off his head because he couldn’t breathe but the knife dug deeper, cutting him. Then the knife was released by the  attacker  who  had  been  holding  him  from  behind,  breathing alcoholic fumes into his ear. When he started to struggle with the sack again, he felt the knife swung about as if it was being used to slash at his hands. Whenever he regained consciousness, it was to feel the thud of being struck with something heavy. He heard his bones break with a pain that forced him to open his shock-sealed lips, and call out  through  the  muffling  bag  to  his  father.  This  was  when, through  the  white  light  of  pain,  he  witnessed  his  childhood, always moving back into the arms of his father. A little boy safe with  his  father:  telling  his  father  to  run,  run  faster,  and  he  felt himself  sinking  into  water.  He  was  wet  and  hurt,  and  his  arms, stretched  out  in  front  of  him,  they  were  being  dragged  off  his body.  His  skin  was  burning,  he  was  being  skinned  alive,  pulled behind the car, its exhaust fumes choking his breath. It was during the night sometime when Truthful was driving towards  the  Phantom  place,  and  in  the  headlights,  he  saw  Girlie sitting out there on the road. When he stopped, he saw in the light from the car, the body of kevin lying on the road beside her. ‘We got to get him out of here now,’ he said quickly, but she did not move as she sat crying beside her brother, his head on her lap. She  continued  explaining  to kevin  that  she  had  no  idea  how  to bring him back to life. ‘Where do I start kevin?’ Truthful saw what had  happened.  She  had  only  untied  his  hands  and  removed  the sack from his head. ‘I don’t  know  what  to  do,  it  will  be  alright,’  she  kept  talking, rocking him and talking. ‘Where’s Janice and Patsy,’ Truthful asked, picking kevin up. ‘Nobody’s here,’ Girlie said, barely able to speak coherently as she rambled on to her brother. They drove kevin  straight  up  to  the  hospital.  The  sister  in charge, with no one else to support her, led the way inside the fibro building. It was clear she reigned in this isolated outpost south of town.  Within  minutes,  she  had kevin  on  a  drip  with  an  oxygen mask over his face, pumping air into faint lungs. Then she was on the phone in front of the computer records, ‘Is that you doctor? This is the situation.’ Girlie  stayed  next  to kevin  watching  his  bleeding  chest moving  rapidly  as  he  breathed  through  the  mask.  She  could hear  the  sister’s  voice,  repeating  instructions  from  the  main district  hospital  six  hundred  kilometres  away,  and  heard  her telling  Truthful  that  the  flying  doctor  was  already  in  the  sky, was being diverted to land at desperance. By the  time  the  doctor  landed  on  the  bonfire-lit  airstrip, Truthful and the sister had kevin set for an emergency evacuation. Girlie watched helplessly as he was transferred onto a stretcher and taken  into  the  plane,  then  rehooked  to  the  oxygen  cylinder  and drip. The sister told her there was no room for her to go. Then the door was closed, and the plane was gone. So, things went on as they do when the bad things happen, with everyone  talking  about  it  like  they  knew  everything.  So  many private  eyes.  No  one  owned  up  to  knowing  anything  in  an official capacity. didn’t  see  it.  Truthful  should  have  looked.  He heard  the  car  go  past.  The  car  sounded  like  a  rally  car  when  it ripped up and down the main road. They said, who was going to get up in the middle of the night to look at town louts trying to kill  themselves?  There  were  dozens  of  people  involved  in  the brawl outside the pub, but they all said they were too out of it to notice what was going on really. i  was too busy fighting man, but i  should’ve seen that car and if i  had then i  would have killed the bastards . Some people were kind enough to say that. others  said  it  was  kevin’s  own  fault  because  he  was  always looking  for  trouble.  And kevin,  any  moment  he  regained consciousness, his eyes looked as though he was looking at a whitefired  hell.  Sometimes  word  came  back  on  the  grapevine  to  the family  about kevin’s  condition.  An  old  tribal  lady,  a  traditional doctor, went down to see the girls, and she said she had seen him. She  said  she  went  to  the  big  hospital,  all  the  time  pretending  to visit sick relatives from out of town. They knew she had never left desperance in her life, but they believed  everything  she  told  them.  As  a  gifted  ventriloquist  she spoke  with  the  voice  of  a  spirit,  a  guardian  angel,  who  had  sat alongside of kevin’s bed and waited. ‘He tries to scream the word “fire” but he is still running away, still unable to fight the souls of the  people  who  did  this  to  him.’  Girlie,  Janice  and  Patsy  existed just to get word from the old woman. They sat in the kitchen, or outside in front of the house waiting to see who would come next to tell them something, and waiting for their two big brothers to come home. Inso and donny had left their mine jobs and driven all night over the slippery road in the rain, to get down to the hospital to see kevin. It was just heartbreaking to sit there and look at him. The brothers sat uncomfortably on either side of the bed in side chairs, in  the  white  painted  room.  There  was  not  much  talking,  except about going home, and to offer words of support, just to let kevin know the big brothers were there. They talked normal, not mucking around talking, but strong talk, nothing’s changed kind of feeling, because they were the big brothers, to let kevin know, and let him know when nobody else was in the white room checking every five minutes, he would be avenged, total, and sure, to the end. They tried to avoid looking directly at him, staring instead at the starched white hospital linen, unnerved by the sight of all of the medical equipment which had become a part of him. The machines had dials scratching jagged lines on graph paper. others had dials which shook while trying to stay in one position, while regulating tubes going in and out of kevin’s body, wrapped from head to foot in bandages or plaster. They found they could not communicate anything of how they felt after a few words, so they sat there in silence, pondering who did  this  to  him.  Then,  Inso  or donny  looked  at  each  other  and gave the nod to go, so they could talk, and they left. A few hours later,  down  at  the  pub,  they  would  use  the  payphone  to  call Truthful  and  ask  him,  ‘What  the  bloody  hell  was  going  on  up there?’ There was no way, they told Truthful, that they believed he was  doing  everything  he  could  to  catch  the  buggers,  ‘Are  you?’ each  took  the  phone  in  turn  to  accuse  him  of  protecting  the bastards who picked on kevin. ‘Aren’t you? You moron.’ ‘Give me a break,’ Truthful demanded, and told them to keep away because he was pretty close to catching the culprits and he did not want them frightened off and leaving town. ‘Ah! Yeah!’ donny and Inso replied before hanging up on him, while Truthful was trying to remind them about their jobs at the mine. Truthful was moved to the top of their list of how they were going to deal with everything, once they got home. ‘ They’ve  still  got  him  on  the  respirator,’  Truthful  told  Girlie, the  first,  second  and  third  day.  He  kept  coming  down  to  the Phantom place expecting sympathy for the huge load on his plate. He  still  didn’t  have  a  clue  who  had  beaten  up kevin.  He  and Bruiser were already busy enough investigating Gordie’s death. ‘ There can’t be that many hoon cars to look at,’ Girlie clipped in the icy voice she reserved for the world of the incompetent. She was  sitting  at  the  kitchen  table,  arms  folded,  staring  straight  into Truthful’s face. The other two sisters sat around the kitchen table as well, their big arms folded, waiting to hear what he had to say. ‘ There is no need for the hostilities,’ he replied. ‘You already know I’ve asked everybody in this useless town.’ ‘ oh!  Yeah!’  Girlie  glared,  her  arms  and  legs  crossed  tighter. ‘Well! I don’t think that is good enough. What do you think Janice? do  you  think  that  is  good  enough?  Hey!  And  what  about  you Patsy? don’t  you  think  someone  should  have  been  arrested  by now? Someone taken in for questioning?’ And she looked straight back at Truthful. Her words were like fired bullets. ‘You were quick smart about finding a few little black boys to arrest for that stupid Gordie.  The  pimp.  He  deserved  what  he  got.  But  what  did  our kevin do? What harm did he do to anyone?’ Truthful  was  fuming,  said  he  thought  they  were  a  mob  of hypocrites,  ‘I  seen  the  way  you  looked  after  your  brother.’  He dared not mention that two of the little black boys Girlie referred to were her stepbrothers. Not in this house if anyone had any sense. ‘ oh! really. And how’s that?’ Girlie challenged. ‘ Forget it,’ Truthful said, feeling the last thing he needed was to create an enemy out of Girlie right now. He tried to touch her on the arm but she moved away. ‘I don’t know what I am saying half  the  time.  I  have  had  hardly  any  sleep  for  days.  I  got  to  get some sleep soon or I am going to go mad thinking about what has happened to everybody.’ There  was silence in the room. They knew that he was blaming his lack of sleep on Girlie for not letting him stay with her. They kept their mouths shut for a change, because they knew the truth of  the  matter  was  otherwise,  it  was  Truthful  himself  who  did  not want to stay. Girlie had hissed at her sisters days ago, ‘Said he was too busy. Said he had to guard the prison until he could get some help. Said he had to keep an eye on those boys. Well! That suits me fine,  the  big  ugly  bastard,  stinking  of  grog  and  who  knows  what. I  bet he  is  molesting  those  little  boys  because  nobody  cares  what happens to them.’ The two  other  sisters  had  heard  rumours  many  times  previously about Truthful, Shh! being bisexual. The boys at the pub talked about it around the pool table in a flippant kind of way. In terms of what they heard had happened to other boys after hours, being  picked  up  on  the  road  by  Truthful,  or  what  they  thought would happen to them if they ended up locked up for the night. Neither  Janice  nor  Patsy  discussed  any  of  these  revelations  with Girlie, since she was sleeping with him, and maybe she did not want to know, because, surely, she would know. A woman knows. It was really peculiar how an ordinary house could evoke strange pictures  in  the  loose  minds  of  people.  It  was  really  just  a  simple house.  A  house  built  with  the  hopes  of  raising  a  family,  Norm Phantom had always claimed, when he talked about his home. Yet,  there  are  houses,  so  removed,  they  have  no  call  for  the high moral ground. Such houses are regarded as being so strange, like the Phantom house with its twisty corridor of corrugated iron, it  bestowed  significant  powers  in  the  minds  of uptown.  They claimed it would conquer those it conjured into its grasp. Just as Angel’s  house  exuded  lust,  Norm  Phantom’s  evoked  terrible fearings  of  loathing  from  the  great  minds,  who,  like  the  black cockatoos in flight overhead, only saw it from a distance. People who never came to visit. It made your heart jump. They complained it sent the cold shivers running up and down their spines, just from looking at that sinister fortress of corrugated iron flanked by closed thickets of prickly bush. But they looked from a long way off, at the other end of that long muddy road from town. Crows flew around it at night they claimed. The greatest of all up town desires was to have  the  house  and  all  the  prickly  bush  flattened  by  a  grader. once and for all. everybody  watched  that  black  sympathiser  Truthful  with  a close  eye,  while  asking,  ‘I  wonder  what  he’s  up  to  now?’ each morning they saw him drive out of town. Slip sliding like a bat out of hell, there he goes , in broad daylight mind you, driving down to the Phantom’s place, worrying for that young Phantom kid kevin, even after what happened to Gordie. ‘ He  should  stay  away  from  that  place.’  Yes!  This  was  right, people talk. But it seemed the man did not have a thread of respect for himself, for he went straight to the home of the most hated and fearful  man  in  the  Gulf,  Will  Phantom  – Wherever  he  was  running amok again, who knows where  – and did not care who was watching him. All without a care in the world, even though he knew Will Phantom  had  dragged  the  whole  town  down,  when  he  tried  to stop the mine from going ahead. That whole business had caused people to go stark raving mad. A lot of important people in the government said he had no right to do what he had done. Now, the whole world stared at infamous desperance, and all because Will Phantom could not cop it sweet, his bad luck. This  was  the  reason  why desperance  needed  an  active policeman, an ideas man, someone like Truthful, who felt this was the big breakthrough in his years in the town. It required a lot of guesswork  to  know  what  was  going  on  about  the  place  now.  So, since supposition was the prerogative of the police station, it was part  of  Truthful’s  occupation  to  be  Will’s  second-guesser. once Will  Phantom  heard  about kevin  that  would  be  it.  He  would come there as large as life, reeking for revenge. Truthful secretly surmised in his acts of seducing Girlie, that Will Phantom would not expect anyone to think he would turn up at his father’s house. Truthful thought he possessed a brave idea. He would be waiting when Will arrived. Ideas were very fashionable in up town at the moment, and he felt he had his ideas down pat. He was betting his last dollar on it. The days passed full of cringe for up town, winding themselves up by watching Truthful’s mad driving to Norm Phantom’s house. The  whole  town  rested  on  their  fearful  beliefs,  pondering  and waiting  for  a  showdown  of  sorts.  Would  Will  Phantom  pick  and choose what goose among them was going to cop it – a house fire, a fight, intimidation, terrorism? everyone in town knew the story, that Norm would not have a bar of Will, and so far, he had been the only person who could crush him. He had told the big-head off. He wanted nothing to do with him. Called him a no-good mongrel breed, talking about land rights and all of that crap. Yes! Norm told him what up town wanted  to  say,  ‘We  don’t  want  any  of  that  Southern  black  rights activism  stuff  up  here.’  Would  Will  Phantom  return?  Nothing would stop him now his father was away. Truthful did not rate a mention, for nobody would be able to defend themselves against the stash of guns and ammunition everyone knew Will had hidden somewhere  in  that  monstrous  tin  castle  they  could  see  down  the road. The great speculation about the explosives and equipment he had in his possession was dragged out of memories, and talked about again with interest bordering on paranoia, with new links to terrorism. There were things missing down at the mine every time there was a stocktake. Word grew that Will Phantom even knew how to assemble an atomic  weapon.  He  had  stolen  uranium  in  the  area,  from  the locked-up  mine  at  Mary kathleen.  He  had  just  slipped  over  the fence  and  helped  himself.  It  was  idiotic  thinking,  for  it  was  not possible. The uranium mine of Mary kathleen, some few hundred kilometres away, was sealed, fenced, locked, and guarded. But who knows? Who knows these things anymore when people are living in such a complex world, and people do not talk, do not negotiate a fair deal, do not live by the rules, and will do anything to get what they want? Blah! Blah! Blah! So on and so forth. People talked of the many foreign boats mixed up with the mining. They surmised a lot. For who  knew  what  shipload  of  stuff  Will  had  smuggled  from  black rights sympathisers, from pirate ships bobbing up and down in the moonlight,  just  kilometres  off  the  coast?  Anything!  Anything! Moored there while the stuff was rowed ashore probably.  Anyone could see for themselves what was really going on, they claimed . he was going to create his own race war up in the Gulf. everyone knew that. knew one had to be very careful with surface appearances, especially with a  place  like  Norm  Phantom’s,  which  could  be  mighty  misleading looked at from the other end of the road. ‘Idiot!  Bloody  idiot!’  Girlie  could  churn  Truthful  around,  like wringing  him  fingers-first  through  her  old  Simpson  washing machine, while dragging him out at the other end, smack flat and drained. The sisters could tell that she was plain itching to stir him up. ever since what happened to kevin, she had become obsessed about  old  man  Joseph  Midnight  knowing  everything.  ‘He  sees everything! doesn’t  he  see  everything?’  The  hundredth  time. every passing night, for half the night, the two older sisters had listened to her talking about old man Joseph Midnight. Now ,  sitting  in  the  kitchen,  Janice  and  Patsy,  both  with  great bags under their eyes and barely mobile because of Girlie’s pacing around during the night, wondered why Girlie, who was so quick to  see  everything,  had  not  noticed  the  colour  draining  from Truthful’s face as she yelled his inadequacies at him, straight across the kitchen table. Initially , all she wanted to know was whether he was getting any closer  to  catching  those  mongrels  and  when  he  never  answered her, Well! that was that. It was they who had to eventually serve him some food because she refused. ‘Yer can go hungry,’ she claimed, eating in front of him, filling her own big mouth with a half piece of toast at a time. The moon sisters watched his olive-skinned face fade from red, to storm-sea grey. They thought it uncanny how the colour perfectly matched the corrugated-iron walls of the cramped kitchen.  ‘ old  man  Joseph  Midnight  will  be  able  to  tell  you,  I  am telling you,’ Girlie prattled on with a full mouth. ‘ Then why don’t you ask him?’ Truthful finally barked at her like  a  dog  breaking  into  her  cruel  world.  The  sweat  running down  his  face  sprayed  over  the  table.  Girlie  jumped  out  of  the way with her plate. She grabbed her cup, grinning now from ear to  ear.  She  had  at  last  found  the  crack,  exposed  the  wound, forced  him  to  feel  her  pain.  There  was  no  room  for  little  boys around her world . ‘Go, Truthful.’  Thinking he could just suffocate himself with his own tongue which was already swollen up with bundles of lies stuffed inside his mouth. No wonder he could not talk. But Girlie could grab someone’s tongue and shake it around just by using her bare words. Then,  with  the  bigger  sisters  sitting  and  eating,  trying  to pretend nothing was happening, she noticed he was clamming up again. ‘Anyone hear anything?’  He put his finger to his lips, indicating to  Girlie,  she  should  do  the  same.  Truthful  looked  as  though  he had seen a ghost. He had seen old man Joseph Midnight coming out of the mud along the side of the road outside of the Phantom place  this  morning,  as  he  drove  down  the  road.  He  had  been seeing Joseph Midnight sneaking about just about everywhere he looked lately. This morning, the old fella just stood there staring, mud dripping everywhere, and when Truthful looked at him, he told Truthful he was a bloody idiot. The  dismayed  sisters  sat  quietly  like  little  mice  sipping  tea, and  again,  were  suddenly  surprised  to  notice  how  his  thick  lips were  trembling,  as  though  he  had  just  come  out  of  a  fridge,  or was seeing ghosts, or both, and thought, perhaps he had lost his marbles. They kicked polite circumspection reserved for visiting white  people  out  the  door,  and  Patsy  and  Janice  stared  straight into  his  face,  to  observe  his  radically  changed  personality  more closely. only  Girlie,  continuing  on  regardless,  seemed  to  be reaching his lost state of mind. Who wouldn’t, with her screaming abuse at them from across the table? The bigger sisters lent in to take  an  even  closer  look  at  his  face.  His  heavy  hooded  eyelids were twitching uncontrollably as he stared into space past Girlie. Again, Truthful saw the images which had overtaken his car at dawn. It happened when he had started driving out on their road, and  at  first,  he  thought  he  was  losing  his  eyesight  as  he  stared ahead  at  the  fuzzy,  lighter,  paler-coloured  road  and  countryside ahead. It looked as though there was a fog ahead, but soon, he discovered it was not a fog at all, only by then, it was too late to turn around. He could clearly see he had driven deep into spider webs as  high  as  the  vehicle.  A  thick  sheet  of  white  surrounded  him. Perhaps Truthful had never seen such a thing before, but it was an old  story  that  sometimes  happens  overnight  when  a  cloud  of travelling  spiders  drop  onto  land  from  the  sea  wind,  and  start building  their  webs  the  height  of  house  walls.  Ingeniously,  the spiders work at night, flying through the air as they attach their silver  webs  to  anything  with  height:  electricity  poles,  fences,  long grass, prickly bush trees. The fat-bellied creatures sat in the middle of  their  webs,  while  their  long,  sinister  legs  spread  like  lethal weapons,  and  looked  like  stars  as  big  as  saucers.  He  drove  on, slowly,  foolishly  he  thought.  A  multitude  of  spiders  crawled through his brain. He did not know what to do. He could not go back: he did not want to go back. He was locked in: he had to drive forward for there was nowhere else to go, nowhere to turn around. Without anyone  to  tell  him  what  to  expect,  Truthful  could never have realised how densely packed together those webs were. The  car  became  thickly  coated  with  layer  after  layer  of  the  silky, film-like threads. Soon, he saw nothing in the whiteness, except the webs  stuck  on  the  windscreen  with  the  angry  spiders  caught between their nests. There were spiders crawling all over the car and he quickly wound up the windows. He killed those that had got  inside  with  the  local  telephone  book,  and  within  minutes, locked  in  the  airless  car  and  loaded  down  with  humidity,  the perspiration started to pour off his body. He  found  it  difficult  to  breathe.  He  panicked,  inside  his brain  he  saw  millions  and  zillions  of  cellular  neurons  popping around  like  white  baby  spiders.  The  creatures  raced  into  each other,  creating  old  man  Joseph  Midnight’s  face,  twisted  with anger,  staring  at  him  and  calling  him  an  idiot,  then  pulsating away  into  a  void  the  size  of  a  pin  hole,  only  to  be  recreated speeding towards him again, even quicker than before. Another crazy thing happened to Truthful. His body became weightless, and with all his might forcing his fingers which felt like rubber,  he  held  on  to  the  steering  wheel,  to  stop  himself  from floating  away.  A  lulling  voice,  whispering  inside  his  head,  kept telling his body he was going to die. But dying by asphyxiation was  not  what  his  body  wanted  to  do.  He  struggled  against  the weightlessness blowing him towards the dead relatives assembled in a little huddle in the flowing white distance. remarkably,  at  this  point,  fate  had  a  little  something  to  give Truthful. His body repulsed the ailing brain. The energy must have come out of his soul, for his hands locked like clamps around the steering wheel, and his feet turned into flattened lead on the floor of the car. His left foot was still planted on the accelerator, and he literally flew out of that road. Normally, Truthful would have agreed with Girlie. If you ever want to find out about anything in your vicinity, you have to talk to the mad people. She had always said this, although more often in the previous days: ‘They know the deepest and darkest secrets of this place.’  But  nobody  knew  what  Joseph  Midnight  knew,  and everyone knew what Girlie would never know. It was an eye for an eye. A black for a white. It was just starting. The fathers of those louts  who  bashed kevin  were  openly  boasting  to uptown  about putting  a  nigger  down  for  Gordie. kevin  was  paying  for  the memories,  for  being  smart  once,  from  a  family  with  airs  about themselves,  for  Will  Phantom. Open  slather,  open  slather ,  came  the whispered words which kept repeating themselves when he picked up the phone in the middle of the night, while another voice gave the warning, Stay out of it Truthful, it’s open slather now.  Truthful  knew  that  after  the  attack  on kevin,  no  one  was really  interested  in  harming  the  three  petrol  sniffers  accused  of killing Gordie. Why would they bother with kids who had cooked their brains so badly they felt nothing? Truthful knew most of the town  did  not  even  think  the  petrol  sniffers  had  it  in  them  to  go and kill Gordie. But! It did not stop there. The phone at the police station rang all hours of the night and day, a different whispering voice most of the time, with more warnings,  you come near our boys and  we  will  hang  you .  A  chill  ran  down  his  spine  every  time  the phone  rang.  At  night,  he  lay  in  the  darkness  thinking  how  the town had managed to mould him into the shape they needed, so he had nothing to fall back on when something like this happened. Nothing could happen: that was the dilemma. This was it. end of story now.  on one of the nights following the arrest of the boys and the incident with kevin, Truthful had just started to settle down again after  the  phone  had  stopped  ringing  for  the  last  time.  Sleep drifted in and he started to dream. In the dream he heard someone knocking  on  the  door,  but  he  decided  not  to  answer,  until  the knocking grew so loud, he went to the door to see who it was. He turned  the  lights  on  and  stood  at  the  doorway  looking  at the rose garden, deep red roses were blooming, but to his surprise, there was nobody there. When he looked past the darkness to the streetlights on the other side of the road, he saw stray dogs sniffing the  rubbish  bins.  He  glanced  over  the  town,  just  to  check  whose lights were still on, to pin down where the nuisance phone callers could  be  coming  from.  He  made  a  mental  note  of  those  houses where  lights  were  shining.  He  was  half  asleep,  yet  he  walked around the yard, checked his car was locked, and went back inside, closed the door, flicked the light switch, and turned around. The only reason he was able to see in the darkened office was because there was moonlight shining through the windows. The police station was full with Aboriginal people crowding through the building. He became very frightened. Their skin was grey. Whenever  he  blinked,  the  place  seemed  to  become  more crowded. He stayed pressed against the door. He thought if he were  to  move,  the  people  might  see  him.  There  were  so  many jostling  bodies,  jammed  up  against  him,  that  he  could  feel  the closeness  of  grey  shoulders  under  his  nose,  and  see  that  the shiny greenish substance covering their skin was a sea slime that felt cold and sticky whenever the jostle accidentally bumped into his face and arms. The smell of the sea was never far away in desperance. except during the dry, when the sea returned to its normal shoreline some twenty-five  kilometres  away. even  then,  the  breeze  carted  its  fish smells back to town. Now, Truthful smelt it like old dead fish guts. He  remembered  his  Italian  Mama’s  stories  about  the  ghosts  of dead people coming to haunt you. Moments  later,  in  panic  and  with  a  racing  heart,  Truthful thought, What  of  his  prisoners,  the  three  boys?   ‘ excuse  me! excuse me!’ He found himself speaking as though he was a ghost himself. He pushed, shoved, inched his way through the throng, thinking faster and faster, if the boys could see them too, then maybe, he was not dreaming. It felt like an eternity to reach the back of the building to the cells. ‘ excuse me! excuse me!’ Slowly, like a cloud moving, the grey spirits drifted aside. ‘ What say they are not alright?’ Truthful started to become worried  about  the  boys.  He  could  not  move  fast  enough  now. Tristrum  and  Luke  Fishman,  aged  ten  and  twelve.  Aaron  Ho kum, aged eleven. When the flogging stopped, they had scooted under  the  table  away  from  Bruiser,  and  huddled  against  the back wall, petrified, waiting, for the screaming might come back and take them again. Truthful felt his thoughts thrown through the air by a huge force, crushing back at him through a million possibilities he kept rejecting, saying: ‘They are alright.’ Luke was the oldest, and he tore the T-shirts into strips, tied the  knots,  and  carefully  examined  whether  each  length  would be long enough. The other two boys watched his hands work in the  moonlight  and  said  nothing,  and  then  he  had  everything prepared.  They  just  followed  Luke  into  the  darkness  and  into the  light  beyond,  up  on  the  blue  sea,  swimming  under  a cloudless summer sky. Truthful believed he could have reached them  in  seconds  but  his  body  was  lead,  his  head  was  like  the sedentary oleander beside the jail, betrayed by his mind. It was betrayal all round. The boys were dead. Their shredded T-shirts were the first thing he saw. Three strands hanging taut from the cross bar at the top of the bars across the front of their cell. ‘Say it’s  not  true,’  Truthful  said,  speaking  to  the  spirits,  and  just  as suddenly  as  he  had  been  alone  before,  he  was  alone  again. There was nothing in the building but emptiness and silence. The  only  sound  was  the  high  tide  lapping  on  the  beach.  It did  not  seem  possible  that  they  could  have  hung  themselves. The  cell  was  not  high  enough  and  when  he  saw  their  feet slumped on the floor, he could not imagine how they could have done this to themselves. Yet nobody had come into the building. He would have known. They were sleeping on the floor when he checked  before  going  to  bed.  Now  they  were  dead,  and  he preferred to believe the opposite, and cried out to them: ‘You are tricking me.’ He checked each of their wrists for a pulse, and in resignation, closed their vacant eyes. Still, he was hopeful, he thought  they  were  children.  Children  playing  a  game,  ‘Come on,’ he said, and there was the usual, useless shaking for life to come back. Now,  he  could  not  remember  if  he  had  checked  the  cells before going to bed. of  course he had. didn’t he always make the last check on the cells, even when they were empty? He was not sure anymore. Perhaps it had been the day before. or  the day before that. He ran to his desk to check his records. Thank God, he thought, the records were there. He had been checking, but still, he doubted himself. This time he had trouble pushing away  the  thought  that  he  had  falsified  the  records.  He  told himself he was only creating misunderstandings. Very much on duty, he went back to the cells and took the boys down. one by one  he  placed  them  back  on  the  floor  where  they  had  been sleeping  the  last  time  he  saw  them.  It  had  only  been  an  hour ago.  He  would  have  known.  Three  people  living  under  the same  roof  cannot  die  without  you  knowing  it.  Things  were going  to  be  better  in  the  morning,  he  promised.  ‘What  a breakfast.’  A  feast  he  would  prepare  for  his  boys  with  his  own two hands. ‘There’s his car now,’ the gossipy people were gathered in a kind of protest on the corner next to the Fisherman’s Hotel, and were looking  across  the  street  at  the  police  station.  There  were  bigbodied people standing in the hot morning, with skins becoming redder, and every now and again, another would announce that for no  reason,  he  had  felt  the  cold  shivers.  Then  others  would announce how they felt faint. It was hard waiting when there was an awful stench coming from the police station, drifting down the street and all over town. ‘He mustn’t  have  a  sense  of  smell,’  said  Carmen,  the  middleaged, tightly permed blonde proprietor of the fish and chip shop situated right next to the police station. ‘And did you hear the dogs howling?’  Who  hadn’t  heard  the  dogs  howling  all  night!  They never  stopped  howling.  Carmen  had  been  complaining  of  the stench of something dead coming from the police station for days. She felt vindicated now that other people felt the same way she did. It  was  Carmen  who  started  the  street-corner  protest  when  she came  across  the  street  to  the  pub  and  told  Bruiser  to  tell  that Truthful to clean the place up, before she made a formal complaint to the Council. I nside the police station, Truthful was in another world. It looked  like  he  could  flip  in  any  direction. old  man  Joseph Midnight came along, and said he had looked through the window across  the  road,  and  seen  that  idiot  cleaning  around  his  jail  all fastidiously, looking after the three little petrol sniffers, who were already  dead.  Nobody  heard  what  Midnight  said,  since  nobody ever paid him any attention. Midnight said he had seen four hot dinners  sitting  on  the  policeman’s  special  table,  which  he  had moved into the cell for them. Their food was still steaming on the plates. When Bruiser finished his last glass of beer for the morning, he went outside the pub, stretched himself, and yawned as though he were a bear coming out of its den. He told Carmen and her streetcorner gang that he was going over to the station to check on the situation. Three times he knocked on the door and everyone could hear him as plain as day, but Truthful did not answer. undeterred, Bruiser walked back across the street, said nothing, got into his car, and completed a mud spraying wheelie right across to the police station. This time he did not knock. He just walked straight in after his rifle blew the lock clean off the door. ‘What the  fuck  are  you  doing?’  he  asked  Truthful,  after  he walked  in  and  saw  what  the  cop  was  doing.  Truthful  did  not answer, he was in a daze. Bruiser very quickly understood that the man  was  off  with  the  pixies  –  tending  dead  bodies  like  that.  He stood  well  back,  sickened  with  the  overpowering  smell  of  death. Trying  to  stay  calm,  he  watched  Truthful  moving  each  stiffened body. He was moving the boys from their upright position, leaning against the front part of the chairs where they had been arranged around the dinner table, and carrying them, one by one, back to their bunks, where he gently placed a blanket over each. ‘ They are dead man. How come they are dead?’ Bruiser knew he had made a mistake as soon as he had spoken. Truthful just stared blankly at the floor with a smile on his face. Bruiser smiled weakly too, in case Truthful noticed him before he had a chance to get out of the building. He tried to be quiet, like a mouse, without making any sudden noise to upset him. He could hear his heart thumping like a drum. relieved he had reached the door in one piece, he closed it quietly behind him. He got back into his car and completed a second wheelie back to the pub, and went straight inside, without saying a word to Carmen and the gang who had followed him. ‘ They are all dead. All of them. ’Cept Truthful. He’s gone stark raving mad. Give us a drink will ya?’ ‘Can ’t be.’ Someone whispered. ‘ The smell inside, man, it was that strong I am telling you, I thought I was going to pass out. Hurry up with that drink Lloydie.’ Bruiser began telling everyone crowding around him what he had seen.  They  watched  him  spitting  out  his  words  as  though  he wanted to be rid of the shock as quickly as possible. Lloydie Smith, with detached face, placed a large glass of beer down on the bar. Bruiser swallowed it with a single gulp. ‘Can ’t be,’ someone kept whispering. All of the people gathered in  the  bar  had  anxiously  cushioned  themselves  around  Bruiser, not  wanting  to  miss  a  word  of  the  terrible  things  he  had  seen. Ignoring them, and speaking directly to Lloydie, Bruiser said his head felt like a merry-go-round. It seemed life was not spinning fast enough, for with resignation and loss in his voice, he claimed, ‘They were catching me.’ This was the best way to explain what he  preferred  to  have  kept  to  himself.  The  fact  that  as  he  was backing out of the police station, he saw the three boys running after him. ‘Watch out,’ Bruiser whimpered. The words escaping from his mouth surprised everyone listening, including himself. A tighter circle formed around him and he thought he was going to faint. The cool draughty breeze hit everyone in the face. A loud thumping noise filled the bar room, the sound of all their hearts beating loudly. ‘You  are  going  to  die  for  this,’  Bruiser  whispered,  dragging Lloydie closer by his T-shirt, so he could speak softly into his ear. Lloydie looked shocked, for what he had heard was the thin voice of a boy coming out of Bruiser’s mouth. everyone heard Bruiser speak like a boy and thought it was a horrible miracle. ‘How could this  be  happening?’  Carmen  nudged  someone  close  beside  her. Those  boys  were  working  like  angels  –  it  was  the  only  way  of explaining it in the white man’s tongue. But it was nothing to be frightened about, because their poor little spirits had gone to the sea  and  you  would  see  them  down  there  playing  in  the  surf, juggling fish above their heads, if you caught them on a lucky day. Nothing was going to touch them now. ‘Stop it mate. Pull yourself together because this is going to get very,  very  bad.  If  we  don’t  deal  with  it  quickly,’  Lloydie  spoke  to Bruiser, his voice low. ‘Ignore it,’ he encouraged, for he had done this at times himself to shake off the spirits. Bruiser started shaking his own head as though this would free him from whatever it was that  was  bothering  him.  Lloydie  stared  at  the  bar,  startled,  then Bruiser decided to beat it with his fists, as if this would help too. It soon came to the point where Lloydie must have cracked too, for he did a most unusual thing. He hit Bruiser in the mouth with his bony  fist.  The  impact  shocked  everyone.  Lloydie  was  shocked himself. Just when Lloydie thought he was going to be paid back, the mayor turned around and said with a grin, he needed it. ‘Thank God he’s normal again,’ piped Carmen. ‘Get on the phone, and get Valance  to  come  over  here,’  Bruiser  ordered  Lloydie.  The  first time, Lloydie dialled nervously, and had trouble dialling the right number. He tried again, while everyone waited to hear the phone ringing in the Council office, on the other side of the street. It seemed like an eternity before Valance arrived, after being watched by the entire pub as he ambled across the road. ‘Valance! Truthful’s  gone  stark  raving  mad.  You  know  that?’  Bruiser hollered at Valance as soon as he appeared in the pub. ‘He has locked  himself  inside  the  police  station,  with  the  dead  petrol sniffers. The three boys are dead.’ Valance did not bat an eyelid at the  news.  He  had  heard  the  flogging  from  the  Council  office. ‘Now,’  Bruiser  continued  haltingly,  trying  to  think,  while  waving his hand from side to side, to brush off Valance’s attempts to speak, ‘we  got  to  be  darn  clever  about  this.  The  cop  is  likely  to  kill someone the way he is, I am telling you.’ A gain, Valance tried to speak, but Bruiser, pausing to think, waved  his  hand  between  them.  Soon,  he  detailed  the  plan  to capture Truthful. ‘What you have to do, use the phone here and get  someone  to  round  up  all  the  workers,  and  tell  them  to  get here  and  bring  their  rifles,  or  whatever  they  got.  Tell  them, don’t worry about the gun laws. We know they’ve still got their rifles.  We  got  to  sort  out  what’s  happening  over  at  the  station there with the cop, before there is any more bloodshed.’ Valance responded  indifferently,  taking  his  time.  His  soul  was  nothing now  but  deep  hatred.  It  walked  with  hate  towards  Bruiser  but not  with  Valance  alongside,  because  the  shame  of  it  was  that Valance knew he could not kill Bruiser. 

The Fishman had decided to leave town about the same time Norm had taken to the sea. The convoy, with its noisy exhaust pipes spewing black fumes, drove like a long  black  snake  through  the  storm-darkened  town.  More white  crosses  had  been  hand-wiped  over  the  muddied  cars. The Fishman told Angel he was leaving. He said he wanted to beat the clouds gathering, before the Wet had properly settled itself over the plains again. He drove around the outskirts of desperance, signalling his convoy to set forth, with a bony arm swinging assuredly, as each car drove off. Then, using a finger sign and a face of total concentration, he instructed, ‘Head south.’ Fishman still tried to understand the foreboding that refused to leave his mind since he had arrived in desperance, but the more he thought it over, the answer kept escaping him. ‘Time to move on,’ he told Angel again. ‘Before the devils catch up.’ He hated the illusionary world particularly in desperance, which was tied to his childhood.  He  felt  as  frightened  as  anyone  else  of  seeing  spirits wherever he looked. Where others saw their shadow, Mozzie saw dark  spirits  following  people  around.  They  were  inside  every house,  listening  to  conversations,  remarking  like  gossips  if  they believed  this  or  that  was  right.  He  watched  them  putting  words into the mouths of the living. He knew out on the road, it was hard for spirits to keep up when vehicles travelled faster than a person could run, and in the convoy, there were too many people around talking  among  themselves,  and  drowning  out  the  little  voices  of their  consciences  playing  around  with  peoples  lives.  In  any  case, Mozzie preferred to dwell in the mystery of people, even if he got them wrong occasionally. In the  end,  he  drew  strength  from  a  narrow  point  of  view, where, even if it were possible, there was nothing to be gained from penetrating the cloudy wall into his depressed state of mind to find hidden  messages.  There  would  be  no  time  to  catch  up  with  old friends  like  Norm  Phantom,  Mozzie  smiled  as  his  mind  captured the maker of silver fish, labouring over his work bench. ‘ oh! He is the  real  fisherman.’  He  sat  back  in  the  car  travelling  down  the south road, thinking of Norm travelling the seas of oceans. Ah! The good life. Mozzie worried more for Will Phantom. He had fretted for Will. What was he up to? After he had disappeared at  the  lagoon,  he  had  not  seen  him  again  in desperance.  He thought Will must have heard about the mine men, the ones from the  big  powerful  mining  company,  Gurfurritt  International. everyone knew they were out searching the area for the body his convoy  had  seen  on  their  way  up  to desperance.  Angel  said  that Will would be around. She heard from the girls, that they had to keep Truthful from finding elias’s body in the fishroom. This was all becoming too close, Fishman thought, and he told Angel this. He knew if he stayed the feeling pricking his heart so deeply  would  not  leave  until  something  went  wrong.  He remembered how on the road, he had begged Will to stay away. knowing  that  it  would  be  at  least  two  years  before  the  convoy’s return was why Mozzie had taken him away in the first place. At the time, Will was lucky to get out of the place. The  whole  world  had  turned  upside  down  two  years  ago when Will Phantom had blocked Gurfurritt’s pipeline in a dozen different places along the 150-kilometre stretch, when it was being built to carry the ore from the mine to the coastline. rest on your head desperance!  There  were  insinuators.  It  had  taken  some investigation on the  state of the art pipeline to establish the method of  sabotage.  At  first  it  appeared  that  the  pipe  was  self-exploding across the plains of spinifex. It seemed the pressure of ore travelling down the pipe to the coast needed to be adjusted, then readjusted. Sweating engineers  cursed  each  other’s  incompetence  each time  the  thing  burst,  and  they  were  sent  out  in  the  hostile midsummer  heatwaves,  to  do  the  backbreaking  work  to  fix  the darn thing. It was a nightmare to suspect that a thirty million dollar pipeline had been constructed of the wrong material. What went wrong  with  the grando  plano ?  It  was  a  good  question  with  no answer. oh !  Yes!  The  Fishman  convoy  had  been  lucky  to  get Will Phantom out of town alive. Security was running mad. No one  had  seen  the  likes  of  it  before. every  exit  point  had  been heavily guarded. When the  big  miner  threatened  to  withdraw,  halting  further building of the mine, the town watched as its population increased by one hundred per cent. The State Premier ordered a squadron of police to be flown in from the state’s capital down South to help search for Will Phantom. There were dozens of pot-bellied police stationed  in  plastic  chairs  at  all  of  the  river  crossings.  When  the religious convoy had reached the crossing of the wide, tide-surging Normal river on the edge of town, Mozzie Fishman saw what they would have to confront to cross the bridge. He studied the rifles first, and behind the rifles, the set faces of dozens of police officers, uniformed and plain-dressed, lined up on the other side of the bridge. Further back, police cars were swung across  the  road  as  a  roadblock,  ready  and  waiting.  When  the convoy started to cross the bridge, for it was already too late to turn around,  the  uniformed  police  came  forward  with  the  German shepherds. Mozzie saw the dogs panting for a drink of water, and very  quietly,  sent  word  back  through  the  cars:  ‘It  is  nothing.  Be brave.  The  dogs  are  just  a  threat. everything  will  be  searched. Pretend it’s nothing.’ It did not pay to protest when the police made the occupants of the  unregistered  cars  push  their  vehicles  over  the  side  into  the flooding river. The ones who did, if they had been observant, would have just been fast enough to see the slight tug of the handler’s lead, a signal, before the dog lunged. Then, knocked to the ground and savaged, they crawled on their stomachs to slip over the side of the bridge. Well! When they clung onto the wooden planks – as thick as railway sleepers, simply hanging there, suspended over the swollen body  of  the  brown  snake  ripping  along  at  a  tremendous  speed below on its way to the sea, they might have heard laughter, and for brief  moments  felt  the  sensation  of  shock  at  the  incongruous misplacement of mirth with fear. Then, with the sounds of savage snarling  dogs  ringing  through  their  heads,  the  dogs  thrashing about  above,  ripping  at  their  ears  and  the  backs  of  their  clinging knuckles, their bloodied hands were slippery like black eels. If there were moments to spare, they retained their last hold by dragging their  hands  through  the  long  splinters  of  that  old  bridge  which became impaled in the palms of their hands. Finally, they would let go.  They  fell  through  the  brown  depths  of  the  raging  waters, surfacing metres down river, looking back to the sea of blank faces on the bridge, watching them disappear to kingdom only come. But with all of that, it was some kind of comic relief when the convoy  got  through,  and  the  police  missed  Will.  Still,  Mozzie thought,  Will  was  never  going  to  be  the  picture  of  anyone’s stereotypical  black  rebel,  guerilla,  activist,  stirrer.  He  was  too familiar, like an invisible man, who walked through his whole life in a town without anyone batting an eyelid to notice what he looked like.  The  chief  detective  thought  the  whole  town  was  brain  dead when every person with civic responsibilities responded likewise – ‘Ah!  They  all  look  the  same  to  me.’  ‘Can’t  tell  them  apart,  never could.’ Call it providence! Call it neglect! Call it what you will. There was  not  a  single  picture  in  town  of  Will  Phantom.  Both  factions gave  contradictory  descriptions.  They  used  whatever  wardrobe full of memories they possessed. Anyone who sprang to mind they gave as their honest opinion of the description of Will. They were more interested in rhetoric. There was more to say about warring factions and community disputes, than the likes of Will Phantom, and his cohorts in crime against others. The senior detective had to say very loudly at least a hundred times in his best attempt at broken english, that he was not into theorising or analysing their brawls. He did not want to think about it. He was a very hard man. The police hurried away to ring up the regional news  papers, but somehow, even they did not have a picture of Will Phantom. Not a single snapshot in all of their records. unbelievable! even though  he  had  excelled  in  all  school  sports  and  was  once  the student of the year. The police went down to the Council office to look at the historical records. Yes, they were sure there was a photo somewhere – Man of the Match on Picnic day sometime. An  Aboriginal  boy  with  a  big  grin.  Caught  the  biggest  fish during  the easter  fishing  competition.  You  heard  about  the fishing  comp?  It’s  very  popular?  No.  No  picture  must  have  been taken that year. Sorry! The police had already been through the school . Where were the  class  photos? i  can’t  believe  you  have  no  class  photos  of  Will Phantom?  The senior detective hissed how he was sick of being in the mongrel town, while he looked incredulously at the unkempt piles of crumpled photos spread over the green pingpong table. There were dozens of photos, but nothing that showed this person had once spent eight years of his life in the building. Didn’t he go to school? they asked out of interest. yes! yes! he sang ‘Sweet Caroline’ and ‘Come Lately’ when he walked home from school.  The police learned Will was a charming boy with a  melodic  voice  who  sang  Neil diamond  songs.  The  whole  town loved listening to him. often the whole town would be singing the same song in his wake, as he walked past. The police went straight down to the Phantom’s house. At least twelve good men using a fine-tooth comb searched every inch, two times, maybe three, and came up with nothing. Nobody could beat Angel day’s daughters for fastidiousness. Norm had ordered them to destroy anything that would remind them of Will, the day he left home.  Norm  Phantom  did  not  help  the  senior  detective  either, since he insisted that someone called Will Phantom was no relative of theirs, never was, and never would be. The Phantom family were paraded in a line at the police station in front of all of the out-of-town police. The senior detective spoke to his men: ‘This is to help you men to get a bit of a gander at what you are looking for.’ He walked up and down in front of the silent family,  and  in  return  they  glared  back,  with  spite  in  their  eyes. There  was  no  strong  family  resemblance  running  through  them, anyone  could  see  that,  but  the  senior  detective  saw  smidgens  of familiarity, and must be credited for his exceptional detective skills. The  four  eldest,  Inso  and donny,  Janice  and  Patsy,  were  on  the heavy side although each had completely different facial features. The old people called it a testimonial to the strong differences in both  their  parents.  Girlie  and kevin  were  worlds  apart  from their older siblings. Both were skinny as rakes, but again, perhaps, looking more like their father. Angel day did not help either. Treating what was happening to her like a terrible illusion, La Goddess of Mozzie Fishman was very annoyed  to  be  rudely  rejoined  to  the  family  she  had  quit  having anything to do with a long time ago. She had a new life, she told the senior detective. even minding her own business did not seem to be enough these days. ‘What a family,’ she had scoffed with her words flowing like butterflies. ‘Police barging into your home, and even though we have done nothing, I am forced to come down to the  police  station  and  parade  around  like  I  was  nothing  but  a bullock in the cattle yard.’ Femme  fatale  almost  flew  out  of  her  house  after  she  finished complaining  about  the  invasion  of  privacy.  But  she  absolutely refused to get into the police car when she saw her ex sitting there. ‘I am not going to sit next to that bastard,’ she had told them flat, but how were the police expected to know she had been avoiding him like the plague for years? She stood her ground out there on the footpath, holding the police cars up in the heat, until another car was sent around to pick her up. once inside the police station, Angel day demanded that Norm tell her what he was looking at. Norm was surprised himself that he had been glaring at the way she was dressed. Too tight, too short. Wanting  to  correct  her  behaviour  –  arms  flapping  everywhere, eyeing all the men off, showing her legs like a spring chicken. He wanted  to  pull  her  together,  stop  her  making  a  fool  of  herself  in front  of  the  children,  but  no,  he  remembered,  she  was  not  his property. Then, if that was not enough, she refused to stand in a line  with  her  ex-husband.  Norm  went  up  to  the  desk  where  the senior detective was leaning and quietly let him know how insulted he was :  ‘How dare you parade that harlot next to my family.’ She spat at the foot of the senior detective and when he looked down,  he  saw  that  it  had  landed  on  one  of  his  polished  brown shoes.  He  looked  straight  back  at  her  and  she  winked  at  him, giving  him  the  eye,  as  she  had  given  many  others  before.  He thought he was going to hit her. Instead, he instructed his officers to make her stand in line, at the other end, as far away from Norm as possible. She said she was quite capable of standing by herself, and with her head facing off to the furthest wall, she did not have to look at anyone. The senior detective looked at the lot of them – six children, two parents – and asked the assembled police, to note the remarkable family resemblance. ‘Believe me! this Will Phantom is going to have a similar look about him.’ A hick town crook was not going to beat a smart man like him. Satisfied, he clapped his hands. ‘So let’s go boys, we got a job to do.’ When the mud dried… Claypans breathed like skin, and you could feel it, right inside the marrow of your bones. The old people said it was the world stirring  itself,  right  down  to  the  sea.  Sometimes,  in desperance, everyone heard the drying mud crack in the vast claypans. You could  hear  the  ground  groaning,  splitting  its  epidermis  into channels of deep cuts all across the ground. It looked like a fisherm an’s net, except it was red brown, and it trapped what  ever was down below from breaking through to the surface. It made you think that whatever it was living down underneath your feet, was much  bigger  than  you,  and  that  gave  them  old  clan  folk  real power.  They  said  it  was  a  good  reason  to  keep  on  living  right where  they  were. keep  it  right. everyone  had  to  keep  fighting those  old  spirit  wars,  on  either  side  of  that, Got  nothing,  going nowhere  neither, Uptown . ‘This  is  the  only  safe  place  left,’  old  man  Joseph  Midnight  kept repeating to himself, as he wandered in and out of his old bit of a lean-to home. The structure of tin and plastic, in an ongoing state of  disarray,  stood  behind  the  brand-new  house  the  government had given him free – lock, stock and barrel – for cooperating with the mine, but which he said, ‘Was too good to use.’ His relatives, resigned  to  the  fact  that  the  old  man  was  beginning  to  lose  his marbles, took no notice. Midnight was an example of what would happen to themselves one day. It was what they would also do for staying alive so long – the last flicker of life was like this.  old Joseph had stopped walking over to the town. It had been his daily  habit  for  decades  and  an  inspiration  to  his  clan.  He refused to look after himself. He had no food. He just left it up to whatever relatives were around to make sure he got something to eat.  They  scolded,  plonking  a  sandwich  or  a  plate  of  stew  on  his lap. ‘Well! What’s the point of being alive if you are not prepared to  look  after  yourself  properly.’  Grumbling  and  moaning  about everything, and no thank you, mind you, they finished up saying, ‘You  are  nothing  but  humbug,  old  man.’ one  square  meal  a  day was not worth being spat on he told them, and they hurried away, bloated with complaints, ‘Who cares about being loaded down with the  old  bugger  anyway.’  He  was  like  lead,  that  empty  seashell, called  relative.  Yet,  they  were  so  morally  obligated,  conscience could not be unlinked and unravelled from family matters even on  eastside. old man Joseph Midnight, heard speaking to his dead relatives as though he too was already dead, said his kinfolk were not worth two  bob.  ‘Look  at  us  –  we  are  just  invisible  people  around  here.’ Watching  him  talking  to  the  wind  blowing  through  town  back  to the sea, the kinfolk said he had lost his soul. Nobody chewed the fat over there, and no one used a smidgen of brain, to fathom old Midnight’s mind. The poison flowed on like contamination  into  the  river.  Nothing  stopped  the  talk  of  poison outside  the  fish  and  chip  shop  either.  Such  as  Fishman’s  people saying elias was dead. Found dead in his boat, they said, on top of a dried-up lagoon. What kind of talk was that? ‘Man should be horsewhipped until he lay dead,’ he growled, waving  a  hand  of  dismissal  through  the  air  at  the  imaginary listener  following  him  in  and  out  of  his  pathetic  hovel.  He  spat towards the new house whenever it caught his eye. He was suffering the  unrelenting  pain  of  a  wrong  decision.  For  days,  he  had  been unforgiving  of  himself,  for  it  had  been  his  own  snap  decision, made  without  thinking.  He  never  gave  himself  time  to  think. ‘Why should an old man have been left to make a decision like that. Why  couldn’t  somebody  else  have  made  it?  Why  send  his  whole world away?’ He was speaking about his grand-daughter Hope and her  child  Bala  whom  he  had  sent  away  to  sea  with elias  Smith, hiding them during the night in elias’s boat, under a tarpaulin. No one but elias knew they were there, when elias had walked away from desperance at dawn, pulling his boat behind him to sea. old man Joseph Midnight had waited, bent low down on the beach, on the night before Norm had set to sea with elias’s body. He looked out for the robot, Gordie, who was still alive then. He was alert for anything moving in the shadows – terns, hermit crabs, and sea snakes all moved along the beach. occasionally, he would give an affectionate rub of pride over the side of his old, tin boat, only newly painted mangrove green. old man Joseph Midnight had one hope. He knew once Will heard  about  Hope  and  Bala,  he  would  go  looking  for  them, because  if  there  was  still  some  good  in  the  world,  and  heavens knows  it  was  rare,  it  was  the  love  between  Will  and  Hope,  and their  little  boy  Bala.  Will  Phantom  had  arrived,  soundlessly,  in  a borrowed car. Slipping along the foreshore through the darkness, checking which boat he would take, Joseph caught him by surprise. Speaking in a gruff tone, he was a heavy smoker after all, Joseph’s voice came from somewhere close by, ‘I knew you’d be wanting a boat,  and  I  owns  the  only  one  going  to  last  the  distance  you  be tracking, so just so you didn’t go about helping yourself to what’s not yours, I told meself – I’d better sit it out here for a while, and wait for when you decide to come down. You make sure you look after this boat properly.’ Will nodded, throwing his gear on board, as he began preparing old Joseph’s boat in readiness for the sea. ‘It’s the only decent thing I’ve got left, you sabie me?’ old  Joseph  told  Will  how  he  had  been  listening  through  the grapevine,  people  talking  –  after  he  had  disappeared  from  the Fishman’s  convoy  at  the  lagoon.  ‘ knew  you  was  coming  home. That was good enough news for me when I heard it. Made an old man’s heart feel good again knowing you might be coming home soon.’ He had waited at night down by the green boat for several hours after darkness had fallen and when Will never arrived, the cloud of doom had resurfaced and he growled at the wind, which was his way of talking to his useless kin, who in all other matters, he preferred to have nothing to do with. ‘Stupid buggers – lot of them. No use to a person at all – never have been. Thought they were too good to learn anything from me – righto then. Not one of them knows one single thing about the sea to go looking for their sister or the little boy. Idiots.’ From a borrowed car, Will unloaded into the boat the gear he needed to take to sea. It was simple fare, several water containers, fishing gear, some canned food, spare clothing. The old man gave him the directions to the safe place in his far-off country – a blowby-blow description sung in song, unravelling a map to a dreaming place he had never seen. ‘I grew up in the hard times – not that any bugger cares.’ Will knew. The stories of the old people churned in his guts. He  responded  in  the  best  way  he  could  to  show  his  affinity, ‘Inhumane  treatment,  I  know,  Pop.’  Yet,  old  man  Midnight remembered  a  ceremony  he  had  never  performed  in  his  life before, and now, to his utter astonishment, he passed it on to Will. He  went  on  and  on,  fully  believing  he  was  singing  in  the  right sequence  hundreds  of  places  in  a  journey  to  a  place  at  least  a thousand kilometres away. ‘Sing this time. only that place called such and such. This way, remember. don’t mix it up. Then next place,  sing,  such  and  such.  Listen  to  me  sing  it  now  and  only when  the  moon  is  above,  like  there,  bit  lower,  go  on,  practice. remember,  don’t  make  mistakes…’  The  song  was  so  long  and complicated  and  had  to  be  remembered  in  the  right  sequence where the sea was alive, waves were alive, currents alive, even the clouds . ‘Will, remember, you will only travel where the sea country will let you through.’ It was only then, while old man Joseph Midnight was watching for Gordie, he whispered the story of what happened to Hope after Will had left town, on the run with the Fishman. It  was  clear  both  had  the  hunter’s  instinct,  a  stillness,  and compelling eyes that saw through darkness. Both kept an ear listening for any sound, as unconsciously alert as the hunted animal or  fish  needed  to  be,  while  listening  for  sounds  from  up  to  one kilometre away – past the Fisherman’s Hotel, past the rubbish tip, past  the  last  moored  boat,  past  the  hovering  seagull  ghosts simmering  in  the  light  of  the  moon.  Tonight,  they  heard  the sound of sea water lapping at their feet on the edge of the beach, while  in  the  distance,  timber  creaked  as  moored  boats  rubbed against  one  another,  and  there  was  the  constant  ringing  of  a small bell on board of one as it bobbed in the ebbing flow of the tide.  Further  out,  they  could  hear  the  engines  of  the  barges travelling  to  the  ships  waiting  in  the  deeper  waters  for  the  ore from the mine. occasionally,  they  heard  the  sound  of  heavy  machinery creaking  before  sailors  yelled,  then  the  droning  of  ore  loaded into the bulk holds. out there in the bay, it was a noisy night with ballast waters ejecting into the still waters. Nature too, splashed from fish jumping out of the shallows. Constantly, dogs barked at the moon. Close by, a barn owl hooted its stanza. The channelbill cuckoos disturbed one another, up in the skies, shouting in a frenzy of old man’s crackle. ‘But what  happened!’  Will  whispered,  with  urgency  in  his voice.  He  needed  to  hear  the  story  once  more,  pushing  old Midnight further, quicker, while knowing in the end he would have to run with the boat for there was little time left to take the tide out. He needed to capture their life, Hope’s and Bala’s, to see everything he  had  missed.  There  had  been  no  outside  communications  with either the east or Westside camps while he was away. No telephone to pick up. No one to take messages. No way of getting back. Will knew Hope could not have left on her own accord and found him. The separation had been complete. ‘Pack it in ice,’ Fishman told his crew was the best way to handle the heart. He said his heart was the perfect  model  they  could  mould  themselves  on  if  they  wanted,  if they had problems handling separation. Will tried to imagine how Hope  managed  alone.  And  old  man  Joseph  Midnight  talked, gently telling the story again, but quicker, as though he thought he  might  be  sprung  upon  any  moment  by  the  elusive  Gordie, slithering through the grass line behind. ‘Well! I got word, that’s all. That the police were going to arrest Hope after those fires. They couldn’t find you. They found all of those who fell off the bridge when the Fishman’s convoy left town. All  the  others,  they  were  frisked  and  searched  at  the  crossing. They kept thinking you were still hiding around the place so they started saying that she was involved with you, even that it was your hand  involved  in  burning  down  the  Shire  Council,  after  the  big problem with the pipeline. ‘ And elias, he was supposed to be guarding, looking after the place, so they said he must have stood by and did nothing when he saw  you  doing  it.  They  had  conducted  their  own  investigation. I  heard all about that bloody kangaroo court they had down at the pub. In the end, they told him to get out of town. After, they were still  looking  for  blood,  anyone’s.  That  was  the  reason  why  they were coming for Hope. ‘ They  had  already  started  to  torment  her  with  questions  and threats  if  she  never  told  them  where  you  were.  The  police  never believed you went away. They was always thinking you was close by. The town was all revved up and harping on, “Nobody knows the trouble we got because of that Will Phantom”. Jeez! Here in town, down  at  the  mine;  I  reckoned  they  invented  half  of  it. everyone reckoned it. I reckoned it too. I heard them saying things like, “ oh! Look!  Fancy  that,  broken  glass  bottle  left  on  the  road.  Bet  Will Phantom did that”. Anything. ‘Some woman said it was Sunday instead of Monday and that was your fault too. Yo! Who in charge of changing time then? Bet Will  Phantom  behind  it,  that’s  what.  They  even  believed  it  when you  said  once  that  you  could  hide  behind  thin  air  around  here. Well? Now you could have been behind every dust storm so they went searching through it, round it. “Where could he be?” Who’s going to find you first? So they come after Hope, just so they could flush you out.’ ‘ Well!  Somebody  killed elias,’  said  Will,  running  his  hand through  his  hair,  still  unbelieving,  but  knowing  he  should  have predicted  all  of  this  would  happen.  Life  had  no  meaning  in  this new war on their country. This was a war that could not be fought on Norm Phantom’s and old Joseph Midnight’s terms: where your enemy  did  not  go  away  and  live  on  the  other  side  of  town,  and knew  the  rules  of  how  to  fight.  This  war  with  the  mine  had  no rules. Nothing was sacred. It was a war for money. ‘I know  he  is  dead.  Finished  poor  bugger.  Fishman  mob  told me  that,’  old  Joseph’s  timbre  was  breaking  and  becoming  barely audible. Will could see how the old man had been worrying himself sick  ever  since  he  heard  the  news  about elias.  Joseph  went  on, saying he did not know what he wanted to believe anymore. ‘You can’t go around burning things down Will, you should know that. A bloody waste of money that’s what that is.’ ‘ Hope was not involved in anything, Jesus Christ. None of us had anything to do with the fires in town,’ Will explained, as old Joseph  watched  him.  ‘It  was  that  fucking  mine  did  that,  and  it’s their own money they wasted, so don’t feel sorry for them. They never  worried  about  us  when  they  were  riding  roughshod  over our rights.’ Will kept his more worrying thoughts to himself. He decided  not  to  talk  to  the  old  man  about  how  much  danger  he thought Hope and Bala were in, if they were still alive. He did not say that he believed the mine had murdered elias and set him up in the lagoon to trap him. ‘ Would  the  mine  want  to  kill elias?  He  could  of  just  died  out there. Maybe.’ old man Joseph Midnight stopped, as though unable to  bear  the  thought  of  the  consequences  of elias  not  completing his journey, if all three had lost their lives at sea. He turned to the new  revelations  from  Will.  ‘The  mine  people  don’t  want  to  burn down the Shire Council office and start all those other fires? They got nothing to do with the town. They must of had a good reason for doing those kind of things.’ His voice tailed off again. He did not want to understand if it all meant that in the end the hope for a better world had perished in the sea. ‘You mob,’ old Midnight said, following Will in his readiness to cast  off,  ‘talk  all  the  time  about  some  kind  of  new,  contemporary world. New world – Blah! to that. What contemporary world? It’s the same world as I live in, and before that, and before that. No such thing as a contemporary world.’ Why should someone old like himself comprehend uptown having reason enough for killing and burning  amongst  their  own  jellyfish  white  people?  ‘I  understand our mob having a go at each other,’ he said, referring to the old wars.  ‘We  got  to  fight  each  other  until  one  day  we  might  git  sick and tired of it.’ What he really meant, Will knew, was that one side must give up and go away. It was the ultimate solution that neither side could resolve. Which would be the loser? It was the only way the fighting of the last four hundred years would finish. ‘ The way I see it, white people treat each other nice way. That’s right  what  I  am  saying,  init? uptown  got  something  –  a  good neighbour thing with the mine. No trouble. No need for trouble.’ ‘It’s called  a  good  neighbour  policy,  old  man,  and  it  means nothing. This town is being used, you know that? used, and they are too stupid to see it.’ Will was annoyed and he wanted to set off. ‘Well!  That’s  not  true.  The  way  I  see  it,  the  mine  has  got  no problem with the town and vice versa. I watch them all mingling, talking  like  they  can’t  get  enough  of  each  other.  The  mine  put money into the town too – all the time by the looks of it. So there is no reason and you wrong at this this time, Will.’ ‘ of course they got a reason…’ Will was about to explain how the good neighbour policy worked to kill opposition, but Midnight cut him off. ‘You know I sent the boy down to your father with a note one time,’ he said. ‘What happened?’ Will was surprised. The two senior men of the opposite clans never spoke, or acknowledged the other existed. Their language had no word for compromise. Was this a signal of defeat? He looked closely at the old man to see where the trickery lay  in  the  creased  features  of  his  face.  No,  in  the  lie  of  the  land, nothing good could have been packaged in this gesture. Norm had never forgiven Will for having a relationship with Hope. And Will knew  that  Bala  was  old  man  Joseph  Midnight’s  treasure,  so  it was a strange thing for him to say he wanted Norm to look after the little boy after the police came looking for Hope. ‘Suppose he  never  wanted  a  bar  of  it.  That  little  fella  walked down that road over there and all of them frogs over on Westside just stopped croaking on the sides of the road, just to watch what was going to happen. Well! From what we heard, they saw what was going  to  happen.  That  old  bastard  did  not  have  enough  guts  to recognise  his  own  blood.  So  I  had  no  choice.  Now,  I  blame  him because  all  of  this  would  not  have  happened  if  he  could  have helped his own flesh and blood. ‘ You  know  what  the  mean  old  bastard  did  to  his  own grandchild?  No?  Nobody  would  have  told  you.  Well!  He  just looked  around  on  the  ground,  can  you  believe  that?  And  the next  minute,  he  picked  up  a  stone  and  threw  it,  picked  up another – threw it, and another. Threw it all at the little fella like he was someone’s dog to get rid of. So, good little fella, he just turned around and come on home. All of them frogs on our side were  that  glad.  All  along  the  road!  Well!  They  never  even stopped  croaking  for  one  split  millisecond  when  he  come  past. They  were  that  happy  to  see  him  they  made  themselves  dizzy with excitement cheering him on. ‘ oh! I wish my little baby was here now and all of these things never happened. I am left with the worse life now. I tell you Will, if I wasn’t old and decrepit like I am, I’d be coming with you. And I  blame  Norm  Phantom,  nobody  else,  and  soon  as  I  am  well enough again I will be going over to confront that dog straight to his face. Square up. everyone will be asking then, “What happened to  that  big  hero  Norm  Phantom?”  And  I’ll  just  be  saying,  “He’s gone away. You won’t be seeing him anymore”.’ Will listened to Joseph’s wishful rumbling – so on and so forth. He wished he could offer credence to Midnight’s story, even when he could imagine it as being the truth. True, when Bala was born, there had been silence. Not one sound from Westside – no shouting out, no rejoicing, no herald singers singing ‘a child is born’. No one said, let bygones be bygones. No one measured the possibility of the child,  who  could  be  the  adhesive  needed  to  create  peace  between the two groups. So, instead of joy, Will thought, stones were thrown of the literal kind. This was where the ambiguity lay in Midnight’s story.  There  were  no  stones  to  be  found  on  the  claypans  over Westside. only  sick  in  the  gut  people  complained  about  stones. Whitefellas  dreamt  of  stones.  And  children  thought  stones  were magical. Will  Phantom  was  soon  far  away.  Alone,  on  the  ocean,  he  had become  a  one-man  search  party  to  find  his  wife  and  child.  He sailed impatiently for several days, after having had no difficulty in  finding  the  currents  old  Midnight  had  told  him  to  ride,  and finally,  he  had  the  low,  flat  isles  in  sight.  The  previous  night  he had felt the changes of movement in the water – the slower flow, the  rise  of  the  water,  which  pleased  him.  Now,  he  sighted  land ahead. The number of sea birds increased until he felt that every bird  in  the  world  was  heading  towards  the  same  destination. Their piercing calls became louder and deafening until the familiar sound of the ocean had been drowned to a murmur. occasionally, Will felt he was becoming disoriented. It was difficult not to be overcome with curiosity, and unconsciously, his eyes would be  drawn  to  look  skyward  at  the  low-flying  feathered  clouds  that swarmed noisily through the skies. His stomach lurched and he felt his mind slipping into a state of dizziness from which he could only escape by concentrating on the sea. The low string of islands were just as old Midnight had told him. ‘Bit like mangrove forests – same colour  as  me  boat  –  good  place  too,’  Midnight  had  explained.  By this he meant, there would be good hunting and good camouflage. The dense grey-green mangrove forests lining the beaches, stuck  out  of  the  water,  all  the  way  back  towards  a  sandhill.  In between  the  mangroves  rose  clusters  of  cycad  palms  – Cycas angulata ,  like  spirit  camps,  like  sentries  with  their  windswept heads  staring  out  to  sea.  In  the  shallow  waters,  the  colour became  greyer.  Will  could  not  remember  seeing  sea  water  like this before, but he kept on steering the boat towards the islands. Later, he realised that the islands were composed of clay, and this caused  the  discolouration  of  the  water  similar  to  how  the  Gulf waters around desperance used to be. Before mining. Very soon the blue of the ocean was left far behind him, with his thoughts of what  Midnight  had  foretold.  The  imminent  expectations  of land Will had carried across the ocean now became an invasion of optimism,  similar  to  his  experience  in  the  desert,  burning  his body with thirst, hunger and love. He rode the boat over the breakwater towards one of the dull grey-green  islands.  With  the  boat  steering  quickly  towards  the shoreline,  he  started  to  notice  in  the  shallower  waters  breaking onto  the  beach,  an  unusual  amount  of  rubbish.  Glistening  in  the sun  amidst  flocks  of  seagulls,  there  were  dozens  of  white  plastic cordial  containers  bobbing  along  the  coastline.  Will  recognised these as an ominous message from the guardian spirits of the place. It was not a sign he had expected. Midnight had not warned him of any of the dangers associated with his old ancestor’s land. Now at the end of his voyage, he felt as though he was holding his breath in melancholy anticipation. The solitude at sea had been a  time  of  reflection,  where  he  had  thought  about  his  life,  and  a future  that  could  be  with,  or  without  Hope  and  Bala.  Heading towards land, he thought optimism had evaded their past, and it had eluded his vision of the future. No good had come of any of their lives. It was these thoughts that were abruptly broken when a final  wave  threw  him  onto  the  chaotically  crowded  beach.  The island had been overtaken by nesting pelicans, watching him with angry-looking eyes, and wherever he tried to cut a path through their nests, their necks lunged out and he saw wobbling up to their mouths, little lumps of sound, travelling and stalling, until breaking out  of  their  beaks  into  a  long,  deafening  screech.  Thousands  of the  white  ghostly  birds  hovered  over  the  islands,  moving  like noisy  clouds  as  they  filled  the  next  part  of  the  air  space  while abandoning  the  last.  Later  in  the  darkness,  he  would  see  the moonbeams illuminating the birds like white lights, and when the breeze shimmered against their wings, the night droned away as though the whole planet was alive with the sound of Indian tabula and clay drums. everything he sensed about the place said that he should leave immediately, so he went back to the beach and thought about what he should do. Nobody could inhabit the islands, which were very small, but he had to be sure. He towed the boat further along the beach until he found a thick grove of mangrove trees by the side of a small creek. He secured the boat under the trees and prepared to wait until darkness fell. He caught some mud crabs and cooked them over a small fire. In mid  afternoon  a  storm  moved  onto  the  coastline,  with  the same  sense  of  impatience  as  Will,  and  within  seconds,  the  clouds burst and the rain fell. relieved, Will quickly took the opportunity to walk, in the rain, through the nesting birds, which were now too drenched to be bothered with him passing by. As he had thought, the  island  showed  no  signs  of  fire,  nowhere  Hope  might  have stayed, nothing that showed anyone had ever lived on it. He went back for the boat and moved to the next island and then the next, collecting nothing but gashes on his legs from the strikes of angry birds. After two days of searching, he rowed across to  a  larger  island.  It  was  still  raining  heavily  through  clouds  that touched the water as he came in to the beach. The island was the last in the group of five. He secured the boat just before dawn. There were fewer nesting birds to bother him as he walked through  the  rain,  and  the  poor  wretched  birds  that  remained glued  to  their  nests  had  their  heads  buried  under  their  wings trying  to  keep  dry.  He  saw  a  lot  more  of  the  puzzling  plastic bottles bobbing along the shoreline. He thought they might have come off a ship, a loose container from Asia perhaps, fallen into the  sea. once  opened,  the  container  had  released  thousands  of bottles  which  floated  to  the  surface  and  drifted,  until  they  had been driven onto the islands. It could have happened a long time ago,  or  it  could  have  been  only  a  few  months.  It  could  be  that simple, the bottles were caught in the waters running around the islands between the foreshore and the breakwater over the reefs. Will stopped  dead  in  his  tracks  when  he  heard  the  tenor.  A voice, lush, rich, Italian, had suddenly broken into a full operatic song,  just  a  few  metres  from  him.  Blast!  the  bottles,  he  thought. Someone’s trick – Midnight’s? rain, snappy gum foliage and high grass  separated  the  slow,  melodic  singer,  from  where  Will  stood, dripping  wet.  He  was  astounded  by  his  own  carelessness. elias, Norm,  Midnight,  Fishman  –  all  sprung  into  his  mind.  Taught  by experts. What would they say? How could anyone be so stupid? He had  not  been  paying  enough  attention.  He  had  been  too  sure  of there being no one else around. He  glanced  down,  and  saw  his  heart  pulsating  through  the skin of his bare chest. Then, from the corner of his eye, he saw the  singer,  standing  almost  beside  him,  with  a  face  full  of expression, expectation, passionately glorifying the perfect day – Ma per fortuna è una notte di luna, e qui la luna l’abbiamo vicina . The big Italian was standing alone in the rain, arms open wide like one of his ancestral Gods. rain dripped over his golden face. Pearl drops of rain rolled down his black beard. He was lost in his song: fortunately, his eyes were concentrating on his fingers directing the accompanying chorus – a family of singing magpies. The black and white  pied  birds  were  perched  high  in  the  branches  of  nearby gum trees. Mine worker!  Will  recognised  the  blue  uniform.  Shit!  Where were  the  others?  He  moved  back  behind  the  singer,  and  further back until he was safely out of sight, then he circled around to see why the mining company had people working out on the island. The  man  was  still  singing,  obviously  alone  except  for  the plastic  bottles  strewn  everywhere,  on  the  ground,  in  the  grass, enmeshed  in  bushes  and  undergrowth  like  large,  alien  fruit.  Will watched the bottles moving by, spirited along in the strong, gusty winds of the morning. The wind, cutting across the island, picked up the song and the plastic and carried them tumbling through the bush, finally rolling them down onto the beach and into the sea’s arms. Will was amused by his mistaken earlier scenario of a freak accident,  where  the  bottles  had  bobbed  up  to  the  surface  from  a fallen container. Whatever  happened  to  vigilance?  Will  asked  himself.  The first and only rule he had learnt about the mine was that nothing happened  by  accident.  The  importance  of  being  forever  vigilant should have applied even way out in the middle of the Gulf, in a sea desert, in the middle of nowhere. once, when he was a child fishing  with  Norm  and elias,  they  had  seen  roaming  armadas  of the world’s jetsam in flotillas that were like moving islands that you could walk on. As they had passed by, Will had seen thousands of screeching  sea  birds  fishing  off  these  sea-made  apparitions  which creaked  and  rattled  as  they  moved  along  the  circling  currents  of the Gulf. Norm and elias ended the fishing and headed home to tell of what they had seen. The mysterious flotillas washed around in the Gulf for months. Stories  that  knew  no  boundaries  grew  into  epics  of  speculation. This  really  was  news.  A  wise  man’s  moratorium  was  prescribed. everyone  was  prohibited  to  go  on  sea  journeys  until  the  flotillas disappeared.  The  old  people  went  around  spooking  everyone  to stay away from them. They claimed they were made by mad seas. And  when  the  sea  was  mad,  dead  men’s  spirits  got  caught  up  in these  phantom  places.  ‘ don’t  look  at  what  the  sea  has  done.’ No one did, unless they wished to be haunted for the rest of their lives. Looking at the Italian tenor singing the country in a foreign language, making the land and sea sacred to himself, Will knew he was stupid to have thought in the old way, like a normal person of his own background. Mining changed the way people had to think about looking after themselves. If a man was to survive, he had to first think of what the mine was capable of doing to him. So much for old man Joseph Midnight thinking the island was a  safe  place.  Yet  Will  realised  there  was  no  point  blaming  an  old man whose vision of the place was ancient. He knew his country in its  stories,  its  histories,  its  sacred  places  better  than  the  stranger now singing a love song to it. His time stretched over the millennia. How  would  Midnight  know  the  speed  in  which  everything  had been  changed  at  the  hands  of  the  mining  company?  It  was  far beyond  anyone’s  realisation.  Will  started  to  calculate  the  danger Hope and Bala faced, if they had made it this far, before elias was murdered and ended up inland in the lagoon with his boat. Nearer, as he moved through the bush, wet from the mist, he saw  the  tenor  was  serenading  several  rows  of  steel  drums,  half buried  in  the  sand,  covered  with  a  net  made  of  heavy  rope  and tangled  with  vegetation  from  the  surrounding  bush.  Further back, he saw a canvas tent set up in the bushes next to the drums, and several fishing rods and tackle. He thought that perhaps the island had become a weekend fishing haunt for some of the mine workers.  He  needed  to  get  closer  to  the  drums.  Water  drums innocently registered in his mind. A storage site for fishermen. The mine worker had his satellite phone attached to his belt. A guard, Will reasoned, who fishes. He started to scrutinise the site more carefully. It was small but open, grass flattened, intended to look like a weekend fishing place. The airborne coastal surveillance team  flying  past  would  not  be  interested  –  if  they  even  had  it marked on their flight paths. Wilderness fishing retreats on islands, which  were  not  much  more  than  wrecked  reefs  covered  by  sand and light vegetation, were popular with remote miners. You would have  to  bring  water  in.  How?  Boat!  Helicopter!  Will  scanned  for flattened vegetation, and looked to the skies. everything was clear, only patchy clouds and sea birds hovered, but these did not flatten vegetation. He  moved  on.  The  world  he  viewed  shone  dimly.  Although his  mind  was  racing  through  the  possibilities,  his  body  felt  too heavy to move. It had already decided it did not want to see what lay ahead, to be told that there was a lot of ground to be covered, to establish whether Hope and Bala had come this far, and what had  happened  to  them.  He  pushed  himself.  Go  on.  Leave  the drums. He smiled sarcastically as he mulled over the most obvious scenario  of  the  fishing  camp.  A  riproaring  black  market  trade spinning  off  the  mines  in  the  Gulf.  Who  was  involved?  Who knows?  Who  cares?  What  was  the  environmental  hazard  to  his traditional  country?  Some  little  operation  like  this  could  be  very lucrative for any of the miners wanting to make their retirement package. Nothing short of an olive plantation back in the home country  for  the  Italian.  Palaces  in europe  or  Asia  for  the management. Will  scorned  the  thought  of  transport  ships  now  frequently moving up and down the northern coastline. The whole oceanic world seemed to be occupied in the Gulf. It was a grey painter’s palette  of  tankers  exchanging  mining  equipment  for  mined  ore that  came  to  the  coast,  after  the  flesh  of  the  earth  had  been shunted  there  by  pipelines,  tying  up  the  country  with  new dreaming  tracks  cutting  through  the  old.  Big  ships,  small  ships pulled in from all over the world bringing tinkers, tailors, beggarmen, thieves. Anchored off desperance, the ships waited for the barges to bring the ore out through the dredge tracks cut in the grey  shallow  waters  where  there  were  once  lush  green  flowing seagrass  meadows.  How  easy  it  would  be  for  a  ship  to  stop  by some remote reef to pick up a bit of unofficial cargo. uranium? Gold  in  lead?  Will  was  knowledge  galore,  navigating  his  own nirvana. The Italian continued singing to the birds and Will was moving through the bush out of view. or was he? Yes, he remembered, he was certain, but why had he fallen asleep? His head screamed with pain.  The  helicopter  roared  in  flight.  He  tried  to  remember backwards.  What  had  happened  from  the  moment  he  started edging himself away from the miner’s camp to now? All he could see was an unfathomable darkness. He lay face down on the floor of the moving sound. His legs felt as though they had been stuck together. His arms were pinned to his side. The tape he imagined, was the iridescent yellow the company used to seal the boxes and eskies  carrying  chemicals.  The  sound  was  deafening. only  pain hammered  inside  his  skull.  He  struggled  to  keep  together  a  few simple thoughts. He was on a helicopter. The spinning rotor blades and the engine exploding through his head killed any thoughts of trying to understand what had happened. Instinctively,  he  moved,  struggled  to  free  himself,  before realising he was better off pretending to be unconscious, but it was too  late.  He  felt  his  head  dragged  back  by  his  hair.  At  the  same time, a boot was pushed into his back. The tape was ripped off his eyes.  His  head  was  jerked  around  to  face  the  light.  First  he  saw white-edged blue. Then the sun at nine o’clock, and he realised it was mid-afternoon. down below was the ocean. He tried to turn his head  to  see  the  person  who  gripped  his  hair,  but  the  boot  sunk deeper and his head was jerked back again. The door slammed open and a cold wind smashed against his face.  He  knew  the  feel  of  her  body  passing  and  now  that  feeling crossed over him, and Hope fell. He sees, sees her face calm, her dress blue, she liked the colour blue like the ocean and sky, and he struggled  to  free  himself.  He  used  every  muscle  in  his  body  to slither out – to fall with her. In those moments, he slides, pushed and  shoved  against  the  force  of  the  wind  screaming,  but  Hope falls  with  her  silent  dress  blue  into  everything  blue,  and  he  is recaptured  by  those  hands  gripping  his  hair  more  tightly  from behind and the boot, square into his back, planting him down on the floor. The only possible moment had passed, and the door was relocked. He listened, but he never heard the ocean, or Hope, only the flying murderers screaming to each other, then he vomits. The mask  has  been  ripped  off  his  mouth  so  he  does  not  choke.  This time, when darkness descends, he feels the blow striking the back of his head. All moments in time are the mysterious and powerful companions of fate… The realisation is especially true for those final moments that end life. The ghostly liberators hastily pass by the living to knock your breath away. No time at all before the soul has sped from the body  onto  a  breeze  where  a  moth  was  flickering  by  on  a  day darkened  by  low  passing,  kidney-coloured  clouds.  Time  goes  on, and  one  thinks,   What  of  the  living? You  do  not  want  to  believe  in death.  You  do  not  want  to  feel  the  strangeness  so  peculiar  when death has occurred suddenly. There is a terrible shock when what was ends. eventually, as time trickled by, Will began asking himself if he had  really  seen  her,  watched  her  fall,  unable  to  prevent  it  from happening.  It  was  so  easy,  preferable  even,  to  begin  doubting yourself. He kept asking himself – was it really Hope? Could this thing  of  nightmares  have  happened  to  her?  How  could  he  have been so utterly powerless? In all of his visions of the future, which he  believed  were  in  his  grasp,  there  was  no  place  where  dreams were snapped off at the base to prevent growth. He wished he had only dreamt what he had seen. But this was not his dream. The helicopter  blades  droned  on  through  his  head  as  he  lay semi-conscious on the floor of the moving aircraft. He breathed fire from the stench of aviation fuel. He fought against his inconsolable sadness. He wiped away confusion and nausea by imagining it had to  have  been  someone  else’s  limp  body  he  had  imagined  going through  the  door  a  hundred  times.  But  every  time,  it  was  Hope who came back, coming back into the open door of the helicopter smiling,  then  falling  out  again,  over  and  over.  He  could  not remember the look on her face as she fell, but nothing could take away the fact that it was her. The very first time he had seen her, she was walking in the rain, and from where he was sitting on the ground, the first thing he noticed  was  how  her  bare  feet  slushed  through  the  mud.  Wet yellow grass blew on both sides and he had watched her from a distance, coming his way, with a dirty, sodden, royal blue doona wrapped  around  her.  She  looked  like  a  big  child  amidst  the smaller children who walked with her. He knew they had come from  the eastside  camps  to  join  the  people  he  was  sitting  with next to the river. everyone had been talking for hours about the mining  company  Gurfurritt . Will  was  listening,  sizing  up  the mixed reactions to the mine. Sabotage playfully plagued his mind. He listened to someone saying people were dying while they were talking. ‘We are burying people  and  all  we  do  is  talk.’  It  was  true. even  this  meeting  had been  adjourned  for  a  funeral.  Will  had  come  hoping  to  recruit helpers with his fight for land rights. The fires were getting out of hand. Half of the plains were burning. He had to be careful whom he trusted. Allegiances were changing constantly and he knew the reason  why. over  many  months,  he  had  watched  Gurfurritt  play the  game  of  innocence  with  bumbling  front  men  who  broke  and won the hearts and minds of more and more of his own relatives and  members  of  their  communities,  both  sides  of desperance. Will  did  not  underestimate  those  innocent  friendly  meetings where the mining representatives claimed not to know what was required from Native title claims. He believed the company knew government  legislation  and  procedures  related  to  Indigenous rights like the back of its hand. His mildest to wildest dreams were swamped with top silks who provided piece by piece legal advice to the supposedly ignorant Joe Blow, the local mining negotiator, from as far away as New York. Some people were talking about the jobs they would be getting.  you very, very wrong .  They were arguing against the pro-land-rights brigade. Whoever heard of it around here before? Land rights kind of talk. Not  going  to  happen  here i  tell  you  that  right  now .  Huuump!  Some were called up town niggers to their face. others were saying they wanted  the  mining  company  to  give  the  country  back. others were opposed to having any mines on their sacred country. Full stop . Some people said how they would kill anybody going against country. We  can  make  it  look  like  an  accident.  Get  em  when  they  been drinking . Manslaughter  kind  of  fighting .  They  claimed  murders  of somebodies  could be arranged to look like accidents. yah! yah talkin air .  A  nervous  vein  ran  through  the  meeting  whenever  the strength of lawlessness was observed in their community. Talk  was  always  cheap.  Cost  nothing.  And  talking  like  Che Guevara  made  the  huffy  people’s  hair  on  the  top  of  their  heads stand  straight  up  on  end.  A  chill  ran  right  down  their  backs.  So! Without saying a word, because the meek do not speak, they went heave-ho,  in  favour  of  chucking  out  wildness. everyone  who  was not  talking  animal  madness  like  they  were  hearing,  was  quiet. Instead, they said, without saying a single word, if it was going to be like that – okay then. No one would bother speaking anymore. Then  the  moment  was  broken  by  the  sound  of  young  laughter floating through the air, from this little group from along the track, breaking through the smoke of smouldering fires. Will knew almost instinctively where the helicopter was descending, flying south, down towards a landing depot, at the mine. The helicopter pad was an isolated plateau where the wind rattled through large warehouses and hangars that had been built by the mine next to  the  petrol  pumps.  Light  aircraft  and  survey  helicopters  were housed in these buildings. The complex was large enough for all repairs  and  maintenance  to  be  undertaken  by  the  mine’s  wellsupplied  workrooms.  The  precinct  was  a  self-contained  entity, enclosed by cyclone fencing. e veryone on earth would agree that it had cost a bomb. The door  to  the  helicopter  opened  before  the  engine  had wound down, and Will was thrown out onto the ground. When he landed on his side and felt the dust flying up his nostrils, he rolled over face down into the earth. Through the spiralling red dust, two sets of feet ran out of the way of the moving waves of dust. each man  demonstrated  a  sharp  alertness  which  meant,  Will  knew,  if they were involved in this kind of activity for the mine, they were most likely in peak physical fitness. He estimated both were about the same age as himself. After the helicopter lifted, he was covered red by the falling dust. ‘Are you sure?’ The Fishman sought clarity. ‘ of course we seen it, we’re sure alright.’ This was the story of the two thieves, who saw the whole thing happen as they carried out surveillance activities around  the  hangars,  checking  on  what  they  called  ‘that  bloody mining  operation.’  Fishman’s  men,  who  had  returned  emptyhanded,  waved  aside  further  communications . ‘Wait  a  minute.’ Both  were  bent  forward,  with  hands  on  the  top  of  their  knees, waiting to catch their breath. Not fit men, they had run, stumbling through  fifteen  kilometres  of  spinifex.  Their  legs  were  covered with  bloody  cuts.  Incredulously  they  reported  the  whole  darn incident to the Fishman. ‘Cut the tape on his legs,’ one of the mining men at the helicopter pad ordered the other after the dust had settled. Immediately, Will felt a knife rip between his legs. The two men reached down and dragged him to his feet. When he felt something hard pushed in his back, he had no doubt it was a gun. ‘ okay, black arsehole – get walkin.’ Fingernails cut roughly cut across his face as the tape was dragged off his eyes and left hanging in his hair. Will looked ahead. No need to capitulate to his captors, not yet. The ground picture was what he needed to know first: deal with the murderers later. He  already  knew  they  were  dressed  in  the  mine  workers’  blue. Sight of the landscape confirmed what he had already guessed. He knew this country without sight, even when airborne. once, when he  was  much  younger  and  very  crude  in  his  methods,  he  had visited  the  hangar  as  silently  as  an  owl  one  night.  He  had  not believed how easy it was when he had poured industrial detergent into  the  fuel  tanks,  and  because  it  was  too  easy,  he  created  other havoc for the mine, then left unnoticed. ‘Get him inside – over  the left hangar – first one,’ the man with long yellow hair, not the Italian, told the stiff red-haired one. He was  obviously  in  charge.  He  lagged  behind,  dialling  the  mobile phone he had detached from his belt. In the grass, families of softrasping finches – white-spotted and blue, red, grey wrens, flew out of  the  grass,  settled  down  ahead,  then  flew  off  again.  They  were quickly  joined  by  hundreds  of  noisy,  virginal  white,  feathered cockatoos with their plume of golden yellow standing straight up from  their  heads.  Their  wild  screeching  continued  to  gather momentum as they lifted straight towards the sun. This was  kingfisher  country.  A  lone,  deep-sea  blue  kingfisher dashed across the sky in fright. Will watched its path across to the hills. Its flight was a part of the larger ancestral map which he read fluently.  He  does  not  have  to  speak  to  ask  the  spirits  to  keep  the birds away from the mine. See! Mine waste everywhere . The grounds were covered in contaminated rubble. Make them go back to the river . Will had always been puzzled why the birds flocked to the mine. Whenever he saw so many birds around the mine, it raised a lot of questions for him. When would they realise the hazards of  going  there?  How  many  evolutions  would  it  take  before  the natural environment included mines in its inventory of fear? He and old Joseph had sat in the hills and watched the water birds flock to the chemical-ridden tailings dams, where the water was highly concentrated with lead. Afterwards, when the birds flew back to the spring-fed river, where the water was so clear it was like  looking  through  crystal,  in  amongst  the  water  lilies  and reeds, and natural waterfalls dropped between ancient towering palms  and  fig  trees:  they  bred  a  mutation.  The  old  prophet Joseph predicted mutated birds would drop out of the sky. No one knew  what  would  happen  to  the  migratory  flocks  anymore.  Will surveyed  the  distant  barbed-wire-crowned  cyclone  fencing.  An impenetrable wall three and a half metres high, surrounding the mine complex to at least six kilometres in diameter. And the birds danced over it while wild animals clawed their way underneath. ‘You,  on  the  fucking  chair,’  ordered  the  big-boned  man  with the fat face and yellow hair, the mobile phone still to his ear. Will sat on it and waited. He had time. ‘Hello? Yeah! We’re back. And we got the fucking mother load. We got him. Yeah! Thought you’d be pleased. Told you it was just a matter of time. We’ve got the bastard.’ The man with the yellow hair,  eyes  covered  with  expensive  sunglasses,  looked  into  Will’s face. He casually inhaled from a cigarette in his other hand. ‘What does he look like? What do you mean? don’t they all look alike?  I  don’t  know.  Tall,  skinny  bugger.  Got  the  kind  of  mug  on him you won’t want to see down an alley way in the middle of the night. remember  the  cop  we  had  in  charge  of  the  crossing  that time? ’98 or ’99? Yeah! Well! He was right. The mongrel looks like the rest of his so-called family…Yeah! It’s him alright…What? No, she panicked when we took off. Wasn’t any point bringing the bitch back was there? No! oh! Too late anyway. Alright. We found her camping by herself. Yeah! on the island next to the store. Where we picked up that weirdo that time…Yeah! elias Smith whatever. So, you were right. It was a good job we gone back and checked… kid? Wasn’t any kid there. Probably didn’t make the journey in the dinghy with them in the first place...We found him sniffing around the store. Yeah! The Conte’s fine. Singing away to the birds when we last saw him…Alright! We’ll wait down here with the bastard.’ Will watched  yellow  hair  put  his  mobile  phone  back  onto  his belt.  He  walked  over  to  the  door,  looked  out  for  a  few  moments, then  came  back  and  saw  Will  was  staring  at  him,  straight  into his eyes. ‘Hey! Shit-head.  What  are  you  staring  at?’  The  question  was asked with a fist planted straight into his face. ‘You wanta have a go, do you? You wanta have a go? Well! Go on.’ The cigarette butt burned into Will’s lips. He remained motionless, only his eyes alive. Then he heard the footsteps  coming  closer  from  behind  him,  returning  from  the kitchenette  at  the  far  end  of  the  hangar  and  with  the  footsteps came  the  wafting  smells  of  hot  coffee  and  fried  steak.  The  friedsteak-smelling man with the red hair started winding plastic tape around Will and the chair. ‘Just in case you got some fucking funny ideas,’  the  man  snarled,  with  his  stiff  red  hair  standing  out  on tufted ends. ‘Come and eat,’ he said, handing the other man his coffee and heading back to the kitchen to deal with his cooking. ‘You can see the mongrel’s eyes. He can’t wait to get his hands on us,’ the yellow-haired one replied, drinking the coffee down in a single gulp. He wiped what remained in the cup across the air, in front  of  Will,  and  was  not  hurrying  off  for  food.  Whatever  was misplaced  in  his  mind  was  not  hungry  for  food.  He  found  it necessary  to  torment  Will  a  bit  more.  He  needed  some  kind  of reaction to his achievements for the day. It was as though he could not find enough ways to fill the job description. Inches away from Will’s face, he taunted him with his responsibility for the deaths of elias and Hope, screaming as though the whole world needed to know, not just Will Phantom. Will stared past the man’s ravings to observe the blue kingfisher. It surprised him that the bird he had minutes  earlier  seen  flying  away  with  its  shrill  whistling  echoing behind it, had flown into the hangar and was sitting on a rafter, as though it had been sent back to keep him company. You don’t kill sea spirits pure of soul, Will instinctively knew in his own mind – like  Hope,  like elias.  They  come  amongst  the  living  for  a  short time, perhaps little Bala was such a spirit too, because he was their child. The man’s voice disappeared. The sickness in his soul swelled inside his body until it burst, looking for company and faded away. His shadow joined in its owner’s personal triumph. Both took off their  expensive  sunglasses.  Both  mouths  pulsating,  describing  a crusade of killing; describing how it would not be long now, they would be christening the new pipeline. ‘ It  will  be  a  journey  an  a  half  you  betya! only  fitting  boy  – after all of the expense the mine had to go to having to build a brand-new  pipeline  just  because  of  people  like  you.  I  tell  you what – you got the money to pay what it costs and we’ll let you go. No  you  haven’t?  Nevermind,  once  we  get  you  through  the  mill you’ll come out the other end, nothing but a big pile of slurry for the fish to eat. How do fish eat blackfellas like you? Slurp! Slurp!’ The  yellow-haired  man  laughed  at  his  own  joke  until  his  teeth bared  like  a  wounded  dog.  Seemingly  content,  he  put  his sunglasses back on, and went to get his meal. Will had not heard the threats. He was thinking about the eyes of the murderer, and how he had looked into those eyes and seen his  own  reflected  back  at  him.  Perfectly  matching  eyes  of  despair – a mirror image of the murderer’s. The kingfisher was sitting in the rafters preening its turquoise feathers, and as Will watched it, it too returned a steady gaze until, as though hypnotised, it closed its eyes and fell asleep. Will remembered he had not eaten for two days as a sick hunger tugged in his stomach from the smell of meat cooking. Whispering a refrain to himself – Got to keep the wolves from the door , keeping free of the wolf pack, kill the wolves, keeping the wolves away  – he soon lost interest in food. Searching around the building from where he sat, he began calculating distances and speed in his mind. How long it would take to reach the lagoon, laying out the track through spinifex, until finally, he too fell into an exhausted sleep. The  radio  in  the  kitchenette  woke  Will  to  the  sound  of  familiar voices  from  the  ABC,  broadcasting  across  the  airwaves,  travelling through  realms  of  ancestral  spirits  over  great  expanses,  to  reach into the loneliness of people throughout the Gulf of Carpentaria, the Channel country, and along the diamantina. Stray rays of sun found their way into openings on the western wall of the hangar. The  white  beams  of  light  crossed  Will  to  spotlight  the  dirt  and grease on the opposite wall. The radio broadcast only reached this far  north  about  six  o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  This  was  after  the heat waves had fallen from the sky, and their enormous energies vaporised  into  a  lightness,  clinging  to  the  ground.  Will  listened vaguely  to  the  news  bulletin  and  the  weather  report.  He  had  to figure  out  what  the  two  men  were  doing  behind  him,  but  there were no other sounds coming from the kitchenette. Could they have gone outside? He glanced towards the door. Perhaps their boss had already turned up from the mine, although he  thought  it  was  unlikely.  He  would  have  been  woken  up. Inconsiderate! Will cursed the bloke he remembered seeing on TV. After  the  pipeline  was  destroyed. of  course  that  mongrel  would keep  him  waiting,  want  him  to  sweat,  dreaming  up  how  he  was going to carry out his dream to finish off the little punk . Will had  watched  the  bloated  red  face  of  someone  called Graham  Spilling  staring  from  the  television  screen  as  though  it expected to see someone wanting to destroy his mine jump back at him. Then after an outburst on how the mine was now threatened because  the  company  would  fail  to  meet  the  timetable  of  some overseas  refinery  already  threatened  with  closure,  which  meant the loss of hundreds of Australian jobs, the face had paused, as if its voice had been crushed, as though a terrible idea had occurred to him, that his own job was on the line. Then, after a few moments, he  just  as  remarkably  found  the  strength  to  continue:  ‘I  swear, hundreds  of  jobs,  and  because  we  fully  support  the  sunshine State of Queensland, and we want to help the people in this state get  ahead  and  want  to  see  good  things  happen  here  like  this development,  the  biggest  mine  of  its  type  in  the  world,  I  am offering a $10,000 reward, no questions asked, for any information leading to the capture of…’ He continued, his voice breaking, trying not to be personal about his tormenter, but Will recognised what he was trying to say. For the younger Will Phantom, from the era of  destabilising  the  mine,  the  sight  of  the  face  twisted  into  mock hyperdrama  was  a  memorable  moment,  but  hardly  the  result  he expected at the time from sabotaging the mine. It had been the day of the terrible hitting back, hit and run, bang! bang! bang! Straight along the pipeline with gelignite. Will had always half expected that if he had been captured, the mining company bosses would queue up to have a look at the kind of person who would destroy a mine. The very same newsreader had called this kind of person the most feared of the North. But the red-faced Graham Spilling he had once seen on the television was not the kind of man who would be coming posthaste to the hangar in the light of day. The irony was, men like Spilling did not kill other men. only  the  person,  perhaps  inebriated  enough  to  turn  into another kind of human being, like Frankenstein, could temporarily find courage to instruct the cold bloodedness of killing. Wasn’t it in the dead of night when good people go about their dark deeds? one  becomes  more  confident  when  one’s  not  alone,  and somehow,  this  was  how  Will  felt.  An  odd  sensation  that  made  no sense, yet it would not leave him alone. There was no rationale in the  stupidity  of  thinking  others  –  what  others?  –  would  come  to help him. even though he had not heard any movement, he was convinced the Fishman and enough men were outside, waiting for his signal. Now he saw a different perspective on his arrival at the hangar  when  he  was  thrown  from  the  helicopter.  The  Fishman’s two thieves were lying flat in the grass next to the shed when the helicopter had taken off. Through the dust he had seen them raise their heads from the grass. Hands signalled, questioning what had happened. Then when his eyes followed the flight of the king  fisher , now retracing its movement, taking notice of the whole panorama of  spinifex  to  the  foothills,  he  saw  the  subtle  movement  of  other men from the convoy stationed in the distant hills on the other side of  the  fence.  They  were  back-up  for  the  thieves  scouting  the hangars  for  an  overnight  operation.  Will  knew  if  they  were  still around, then the rest of the convoy would be down at the lagoon. What was new? They were short of fuel. Will looked for the kingfisher but it was now nowhere in sight. He  kept  an  ear  on  the  radio  in  the  background,  listened  as  the weatherman  read  the  weather  report.  A  cyclonic  build-up  in  the Arafura Sea. Will grew interested, remembering an earlier report of  a  cyclone  sitting  off  the  opposite  coastline,  east  of  Cape  York Peninsula. He could hear the words – low-pressure system building into a depression heading in a south-easterly direction along the  Arafura Sea . This  surprised  him.  What  had  happened  to  the  cyclone  off  the 400Cape? Nothing. The weather report ended. It must have been in his dreams. The day he had left old Midnight and taken his boat to sea he had  heard  the  report  of  a  cyclone  hanging  south-south-east  of Cape York, somewhere in the Coral Sea. What happened to that? The weatherman ended with a short statement about a tidal surge due to the cyclone activity in the region. Will closed his eyes and saw the tremendous fury of the winds gathering up the seas, and clouds carrying the enormous bodies of spiritual beings belonging to other worlds. Country people, old people, said it was the sound of  the  great  spiritual  ancestors  roaring  out  of  the  dusty,  polluted sea  all  of  the  time  nowadays.  Will  believed  this. everyone  clearly saw  what  the  spirits  saw.  The  country  looked  dirty  from  mining, shipping,  barges  spilling  ore  and  waste.  Something  had  to  run  a rake across the lot. ‘You really got to watch your step now,’ old man Joseph  Midnight  warned  when  Will  had  taken  the  boat  out.  His voice  had  crawled  over  the  water  to  Will.  ‘Last  couple  of  years, there was one every few weeks, another cyclone jumping around. Whoever heard of that before?’ Jesus  Christ!  There  was  water  piling  up  in  the  skies.  Then nothing. The weather report was over. Stuck in a empty hangar a couple of hundred kilometres from the sea, Will imagined all the satellite  activity  hovering  over  the  Gulf.  Spies  of  the  world zoomed in onto a pimple on your nose, or knew what you were saying in the privacy of your own home. Was anyone looking at Gurfurritt?  If  someone  spied  on  the  weather,  why  not  provide more  information  about  what  was  going  on? rich  men  paid  for foreign cargo ships from the four corners of the globe to anchor in the Gulf to transport ore. It  was  high  tide.  Will  knew  how  the  tides  worked  simply  by looking at the movement of a tree, or where the moon crossed the sky, the light of day, or the appearance of the sea. He carried the tide  in  his  body. even  way  out  in  the  desert,  when  he  was  on  the Fishman’s  convoy,  a  thousand  miles  away  from  the  sea,  he  felt  its rhythms. This  feeling  for  the  sea  had  been  inherited  from  Norm,  and Will began to think of his father on his journey with elias. i  hope you  make  it  to  the  old  world .  But  of  course  he  would  make  it.  Will scowled at his weak sentimentality over his father who never bore his children’s burden. A saltwater man who insisted he belonged to the sea like fish. i ’ ll weather the storm. So said the veteran of the mother of all storms, invading the hangar out of the blue, to this wasted luxury of his son, reminiscing what was once upon a time: if  the natural forces get me in the end, it will be on the flippen land. Never the sea. i  bet my life on it.  Puzzled, irritated, by the commonsense madness of his father’s hick town philosophy, Will twisted about on the chair, muttering to himself: ‘If you’re dead, you’re dead, no need to bet on that.’ But the  memories  of  his  father  were  not  done  with  Will’s  thoughts, even in this moment of crisis. Norm Phantom was keen to show his son whom he had not spoken to in years, something else from the past.  The  little  list.  The  list  boy! did  you  remember  to  bring  the list? How a man could come back to collect his winnings, if he did not  keep  his  little  list  of  fools  in  his  back  pocket:  who  owed  him money, so forth. ‘What’s the  matter  with  him?’  The  Fishman’s  men  had  been trying to attract Will’s attention. ‘ dunno. Throw a stone and see.’ Someone  hit  Will  on  the  leg  with  a  small  stone  to  bring  some sense into his head. Now he saw two men from the convoy standing by the door smiling at him. Then the mobile phone rang. ‘Chuck,’ the yellow-haired man spat his name into the mobile. He had come out of the kitchenette and was standing somewhere to the back of Will in the hangar. ‘What? A fire. You got to be joking…Alright, I’m on my way.’ ‘What’s up?’ ‘Graham said there’s a fire over this way. Stay here, watch him Cookie. I’ll look around.’ The next moment Chuck returned, running to grab the fire extinguisher,  and  ordering  his  mate  to  get  the  other  fire extinguisher  on  the  wall  next  to  the  doorway.  Ignoring  Will, both quickly disappeared. The Fishman’s men had come prepared. knives  were  produced  to  cut  Will  free  from  the  chair.  Within seconds  they  were  outside  the  shed  again,  and  looking  back, sensed that Will was of two minds about going with them. ‘You mad, Will?’ They had only moments to get out of the place, and Will was holding them up. ‘Give me  a  knife,’  Will  ordered,  but  no  one  listened  to  him. ‘Fuck you! Give me a knife or I’ll kill you. They killed Hope and my boy. I am going nowhere I swear to God, until I kill them. So give me the fucken knife.’ Moving around the benches, Will saw a tyre lever, grabbed it, and  headed  out  the  door.  The  two  lads  felt  blood  draining  from their  faces:  this  was  supposed  to  be  easy.  They  looked  at  the  fire down  at  the  last  hangar.  The  flames  were  arching  out  like  waves and black smoke billowed into the atmosphere. ‘Look man, I know how you feel! But those arseholes are dead already. They’re gone man, I swear it, because as true as God I am standing here, this whole place is going to blow, as soon as the fire reaches the pits. Come on, we got to take you with us, fuck you, or we are going to die in this mongrel place. Look up there and see the  friggen  fire  for  yourself  man.  Come  on,  man,  or  we  will  kill you ourselves.’ The two young men, no more than eighteen apiece, dressed in grey  shorts,  baseball  caps,  with  Bob  Marley  staring  from  their rasta-coloured T-shirts, worked simply to the letter of the Fishman’s orders.  They  were  still  wearing  workingmen  boots  supplied  by the  mine.  A  lot  of  the  young  men  in  the  Fishman’s  convoy  had done their stint in the mine, looked around, seen how it all worked, then walked off with their mining helmets and boots as souvenirs. Both  still  had  their  cigarettes  hanging  from  the  sides  of  their mouths,  while  they  used  the  iron-fisted  grit  of  their  fathers  to persuade Will to get the hell out of there. The fire spread quickly across the grasslands, throwing long red  tongues  down  to  the  south.  Will  looked  at  the  black  smoke billowing into the sky. He tried to see through the wall of smoke to locate  the  two  mine  men  with  their  fire  extinguishers,  but  could not  penetrate  the  curtain  of  blackness.  The  only  thing  that  was clear,  were  flames  reaching  up  into  the  sky  at  the  far  hangars.  It looked like a giant candle, a millennium flame. A wind of intense heat forced Will and the two Bob Marley faces to flee. ‘Come on,  Will,  get  a  fucking  move  on,’  one  of  the  lads  said, maintaining a firm grip on Will’s arm. The second lad did the same on  the  other  side  and  they  ran  dragging  Will  along  with  them. They kept looking back over their shoulders as they ran, stumbling along through the spinifex and grass and gravel, seeing if anyone was coming from the mine, or if they were seen. Looking ahead at the distance to reach the fence line, each knew, until they were over the fence and into the scrub land and hills, they would be in full view of the mine men when they turned up in their vehicles. ‘Let’s hope the bloody lot goes up in their bloody faces,’ one lad said to the other as they ran, knowing it might be their only chance, if the bloody lot went up. But when they looked back again, the yellow-haired one and his mate were running after them. ‘Split up,’ Will said. ‘Take the left and right, and I will take the centre, go low.’ ‘ do you know where the opening is Will? Head to the left, one hundred metres. remember that.’ ‘Get  going. I know where it is, get going.’ The three  peeled  off  in  their  different  directions.  The  two young  lads  were  looking  around.  Where  was  the  backup?  The whole  operation  had  begun  with  several  dozen  men  who  had slipped in earlier, spreading themselves all over the mine site, to do ‘a  good  job’.  It  was  to  have  been  a  pilfering  exercise  on  a  grand scale, pure and simple. Then they got word: Fishman had changed his mind. The teams had come in the previous night. They moved on the fuel tanks, syphoning petrol into jerry cans which had to be carried over to the fence line and into the bush on the other side towards a waiting vehicle. They had spread around . ‘ have yourself a shopping spree, tools and equipment – for the road.’  Freezer raid, the Fishman had ordered. usual thing. raid everything. ‘Man! Where in the fuck are they?’ one lad screamed across to his mate. ‘Where’s the bloody backup, mannn? Jesus!’ Guns were being fired. The two lads heard the strange sound for  the  first  time  in  their  lives  as  the  bullets  whistled  by,  inches past their ear, and both yelled, ‘ duck  man,  they  are  shooting  at us.’  Both  ran  faster,  bolting  for  their  lives  like  jack  rabbits,  and Will,  where  was  he?  They  had  seen  him  disappear  into  the ground  like  he  was  made  out  of  thin  air.  And  they  did  duck, unbelievingly, as they ran, seeking cover behind every clump of spinifex,  as  though  dead  spinifex  could  shield  anyone  against bullets.  But  that  was  what  they  did,  and  kept  doing,  with  no backup  at  all,  not  even  looking  back  to  see  that  glorious  fire tonguing  down  to  the  underground  storage  tanks,  nor  knowing there  were  only  moments  to  go,  and  they  would  be  all  feeling what it was like to be blown sky-high, if they did not make it out over the fence and into the hills. Fate  and  precious  moments  are  tied  up  together,  and  as  the saying goes, What goes around comes around : the yellow-haired man tripped. Instantly, his head was split open at the temple by a rock that had, up to that moment, lain on the ground, embedded in soil that was thousands of seasons old, untouched by humankind since the ancestor had placed it in this spot, as if it had planned to do this incredible thing. rock and roll, it was unbelievable to have seen what happened. Will had been so close, waiting to take what rightfully he claimed, and the man was running straight for him, and only Will saw what was  about  to  happen,  saw  the  rock  was  ready,  waiting  for  this moment. Instantaneously, it was as natural a reaction as you would expect, but he felt cheated you know. He had even thrown himself towards the man to try to break his fall. It was too late, a snap, how quickly a driven man could be defeated. Will had no idea a rock could rob him of his revenge. He stood, arched over the dead man in a moment of foreboding, watching the blood pouring out of the man’s  head  all  over  the  ground,  the  glorious  yellow  hair  now tainted red and covered with dust, wishing he had the power to bring  the  dead  man  back  to  life.  Where  was  the  justice  in  this? The murderer struck dead, died instantly without pain, and went on to eternity with the look of peace on his broken face. And there was the stone, still there, unmoved. ‘ Will! What the fuck are you doing. keep running,’ one of the young  blokes  yelled  back  over  his  shoulder.  ‘Jesus  Christ!’  he yelled,  ‘I  never  seen  so  much  craziness  in  you  man.’  Seeing  Will standing there looking at the ground, the young man was certain he would end up going back for him, just to appease the Fishman, and shouted: ‘You are going to get us all killed, fuck you.’ Will heard  and  ran. out  in  the  open  he  looked  back  for  the red-haired  Cookie,  but  he  was  nowhere  in  sight.  Will  had  missed the  moment  that  the  backup  men  with  rifles  in  the  hills  had witnessed. In full flight, lifted in midair, Cookie kept running after his prey before he heard the piece of lead explode in his chest. His eyes jumped to the left, then to right, as though undecided which way to go to hell first, before he sunk down into the spinifex. A dozen convoy men scrambling out of the hills, leaping down rocks, hands cut by spinifex, raced to the fence line to open a hole in the wire. The fence was rolled back for Will and the two lads to run towards. It seemed as though the whole world cheered them, yelling:  ‘Come  on,  come  on,  hurry,  you  can  do  it.’  Then,  the cheering  turned  into  a  synchronised  ballet  of  men  risking  their lives  without  thought  for  themselves.  They  ran  out  towards  the lads, and finally, had the three snatched up by a sea of hands. Their lungs  burnt  with  exhaustion.  A  human  chain  passed  each  of  the three along up to the hills, until finally, they were thrown down for shelter behind the boulders, in the fold of the ancestral spirit who governed the land. The fire burned like hell over there at the hangars and even in the hills, the air was that hot, it burnt your skin. It felt like being in a furnace. dust-dry  hair  turned  into  rust,  stuck  up  straight  and waved in the air, charged up to the hilt with electricity. Well! The moment came then, just how the Fishman said it had to be. And it would not have paid anyone to look back if they did not want to have their head blown off in ‘the process’. They were the Fishman’s favourite two words in those days. The day, all action-packed like it was, was now all said and done. The  men  of  Mozzie  Fishman’s  dedicated  convoy  to  one  major dreaming track stretching right across their stolen continent, were sitting up there on the side of the hill – like rock wallabies, looking down at what was left of Gurfurritt mine. Just looking, and turning the sunset crimson with their thoughts. A   day  at  the  mine  had  turned  into  a  modern  legend  about travelling with the Fishman, and civil morality… What a turnout. Gee whiz! We were in really serious stuff now. We  were  burning  the  white  man’s  very  important  places  and wasting  all  his  money.  We  must  have  forgotten  our  heads.  We were really stupid people to just plumb forget like – because the white  man  was  a  very  important  person  who  was  very  precious about money. Well! He was the boss. We are not boss. He says he likes to be boss. He says he’s got all the money. Well! We haven’t got the money neither. And now, all it took was a simple flick. A flick, flick, here and there with a dirt-cheap cigarette lighter, and we  could  have  left  the  rich  white  people  who  owned  Gurfurritt mine, destitute and dispossessed of all they owned. Straight out we should have been asking ourselves – Why are you not hanging your head in shame to the white man? We were supposed  to  say, oh !  No!  You  can’t  do  things  like  that  to  the, umm,  beg  your  pardon,  please  and  thankyou,  to  the  arrr,  em, WHITE  MAN. Somehow though, everyone got carried along the humpteen tide  of  events,  like,  we  must  have  swallowed  one  too  many  sour pills  that  morning  for  breakfast.  Now,  we  were  looking  at  the world like it was something fresh and inviting to jump into and do what you jolly well liked. That was how our dormant emotions sitting  down  inside  our  poor  old  hearts  got  stirred  up  by  the Fishman  when  we  listened  to  him  talking  in  that  fetching,  guru type voice of his, saying we gotta change the world order. Change the  world  order?  Mozzie  Fishman!  He  is  sure  enough  a  crazy man. oh !  We  said  that.  But  he  goes  on  in  his  satirical  slinging voice  about  what  happened  ever  since  that  mine  came  scraping around  our  land  and  our  Native  title!  ‘Well!’  he  says. us ?  He wanted us to tell him what that turned out to be! We were a bit cross with Mozzie standing up there, Lord Almighty like on top of that rust bucket of a Falcon station wagon of his. It and all its white crucifixes wiped all over the car through the stains of red mud. ‘ You know who we all hear about all the time now?’ he asked us.  ‘International  mining  company.  Look  how  we  got  to  suit international  mining  people. rich  people.  How  we  going  to  do that?’  Now,  even  we,  any  old  uneducated  buggers,  are  talking globally.  We  got  to  help united kingdom  money.  Netherlands lead  air  problems.  Asia  shipping. united  States  of  America industry, and we don’t even know German people. ‘I says,’ he says like he is singing, ‘we mobs got to start acting locally. Show whose got  the dreaming.  The  Laaaw.’  He  liked  to  empathise  ‘The Laaaaw’  whenever  he  was  heating  up  around  the  ears  on  the subject of globalisation.  We  whispered  among  ourselves.  Ignore  him.  Clap  your hands over your ears to put an end to his blasphemy . don’t listen to him. Still he was not finished with us. He goes on ignoring our pleas, and in the end demanded, soft as silk, he knew who he was playing with. All satiny voice, he said it was time now to end our cowtailing after the white people. It was finale time. Hands up. Who we got to follow? The white man, or the Fishman? This was the ultimatum. Well! He made us that wild. of  course, we got no choice  –  we  got  to  go  with  culture  every  time.  We  should  have known he was leading up to all of this destruction. But we? We were like following dogs, and we were happy to do it, not think, because we were acting solely and simply on pure rage. The soundwaves  coming  off  the  explosion  in  the  aeroplane hangars  at  the  biggest  mine  of  its  type  in  the  world,  Gurfurritt, were just about as tremendous a sound you could ever expect to hear on this earth. Like guyfork night. Booom! Booom! over and over.  But  one  hundred  times  more  louder  than  that. ripped  the lot. We were thinking, those of us lying on the ground up in the hills  smelling  ash  –  what  if  our  ears  exploded?  What  would deafness sound like? We should have thought of that first. Sometime during our precious time on earth we could have asked  a  deaf  person  what  it  was  like  to  not  hear  the  sounds anymore, before we go around deliberately destroying our own good  hearing  on  wildness. oh !  But  there  was  no  going  back because  no  one  was  going  to  reverse  where  the  rotten  hand  of fate  was  heading.  So,  even  though  we  were  shaking  in  our  old work  boots,  thinking  we  got  busted  eardrums,  we  watched  the fire  rage  like  a  monster  cut  loose  from  another  world.  It  might even  have  come  from  hell. even  the  devil  himself  would  have least expected us weak people to have opened the gates of hell. But we watched full of fascination at the fire’s life, roaring like a fiery serpent, looking over to us with wild eyes, pausing, looking around,  as  if  deciding  what  to  do  next.  Then,  we  could  hear  it snarl  in  an  ugly  voice  you  would  never  want  to  hear  again. Alright, watch while i  spread right through those hangars like they were nothing,  hungry!  hungry!  Get  out  of  my  way .  It  did  that  roaring along,  exploding  through  walls  and  rooftops  which  looked  like toadstools  bursting  open,  then  once  those  flames  shot  outside, going a million miles an hour up into the sky, sparks just landing wherever, like a rain shower, out in the grass somewhere around the back. The fire spread out the back of the hangars in the dry grass, and then it came burning around to the front again, fanned by a gusting south-easterly wind. Then, the monster smelt the spilt fuel on the ground. It raced through that, quickly spreading itself over the ground weeds, until it found the fuel bowsers, then it paused, maybe  the  fire  had  thoughts  of  its  own  and  could  not  believe  its luck.  The  fire  just  sitting  there  was  as  awesome  a  moment  you could  experience  for  our  men  waiting  in  the  hills,  sneaking  a glance  from  over  the  boulders  they  were  hiding  behind,  peering through the black smoke, thinking maybe their luck had run out and what next. It looked as though the fire was going to peter out. The fire was just  sitting,  smouldering,  not  knowing  where  to  go  next  because the  wind  was  not  blowing  strong  enough  to  fan  it  in  the  right direction. our men looking from the hills continued staring at the little  flame  flickering  there,  fizzing  out.  What  could  they  do?  It looked like defeat was imminent. And, that same old defeated look, two centuries full of it, began creeping back onto their faces. But, it was too late now, they had a taste of winning, so they projected their own sheer willpower right across that spinifex plain, calling out with no shame, Come on, come on , willing the little flame not to  fizz,  believing  magic  can  happen  even  to  poor  buggers  like themselves. Somehow , someone started yelling, ‘Look, look, it is starting to move.’  The  unbelievable  miracle  came  flying  by.  A  whirly  wind, mind  you  nobody  had  seen  one  for  days,  just  as  a  matter  of  fact sprung  up  from  the  hills  themselves.  It  swirled  straight  through from  behind  those  men,  picking  up  their  wish  and  plucking  the baseball  caps  which  came  flying  off  their  heads,  together  with  all the loose balls of spinifex flying with the dust and the baseball caps, the  whole  lot  moving  towards  the  fire.  When  it  passed  over  the open rubbish tipsters the mine had lined up along the side of the hangars,  it  picked  up  all  the  trash.  All  the  cardboard  boxes, newspapers lying about and oily rags, spirited the whole lot across the flat towards the line of hangars on fire. It happened  so  fast  when  the  fiery  whirlwind  shot  into  the bowsers and momentarily, lit them up like candles. Well! It might even have been the old Pizza Hut box someone had left on top of one  of  those  bowsers  that  added  that  little  bit  of  extra  fuel,  you never  know,  for  the  extra  spark,  or  it  would  have  happened anyway, but the wick was truly lit. The finale was majestical. dearo, dearie, the explosion was holy in its glory. All of it was gone. The whole mine, pride of the banana state, ended up looking like a big panorama of burnt chop suey. on a  grand  scale  of  course  because  our  country  is  a  very  big  story. Wonderment,  was  the  ear  on  the  ground  listening  to  the  great murmuring ancestor, and the earth shook the bodies of those ones lying flat on the ground in the hills. Then, it was dark with smoke and dust and everything turned silent for a long time. ‘ You  think  they  heard  it  in desperance?’  some  young  lad whispered carefully through the settling dust, because he did not want  to  frighten  anyone  by  making  the  first  sound  of  this  new beginning. It was so incomprehendingly silent he needed to speak to hear himself talk because he was thinking of his family and the noise of his memories of them was the only sound he could hear. The sound of this young voice being the first sound was a relief for  the  others  who  had  been  thinking  they  were  listening  to  the sound of their own deafness. However relieved and pacified they were to hear speech, everyone kept listening, listening for what else remained missing – Ah! It was the noise of the bush breathing, the wind  whispering  through  the  trees  and  flowing  through  rustling grasses.  We  needed  to  hear  the  birds  chirping,  the  eaglehawk crying out something from the thermals high above, but the eery silence lingered on. The birds were nowhere to be seen or heard, not even a singing willy-wagtail lightly flittering from rock to rock wherever  anyone  walked,  or  a  mynah  bird  haggling  at  your  feet. We  looked  into  the  dust  and  smoke-darkened  skies  and  saw  no twisting green cloud of budgerigars dancing away in thin air. The wind  had  dropped.  Silent  clouds  passing  overhead  cast  gloomy shadows over the peaceful trees, while grasses and spinifex stood stock-still as though the world had become something false, almost reminiscent  of  a  theatre  setting.  We  men  floated  somewhere between the surreal stillness, and the reality of the ants, lizards and beetles  and  other  insects  moving  through  the  rocky  ground  as though nothing had happened. No one spoke or answered the boy, because  we  guessed  the  explosion  must  have  been  heard  on  the other side of the world, let alone in desperance.  one will never know what really happened that day. Fishman, never stopped smiling about it. He said his recipe was top secret. He  was  regarded  with  awe  whenever  he  came  into  anyone’s presence because it was a privilege to know the Fishman. He was respected  for  what  he  had  inside  of  his  head.  Too  right!  Nobody could  know  the  highly  confidential  material  in  case  someone  like Mozzie had to do it all over again some day. Ignorant people would always ask, how did you stop the mine? And he would look at them for a  long  time  with  his  steady  eye,  like  he  was  making  up  his  mind whether they were worth letting in on the secret. Finally, he would say, i   have  decided  to  give  you  the  truth ,  and  the  truth  was  the  very same  words  he  had  always  used  about  what  he  would  do  to  the mine from the day it got set up on our traditional domain. ‘I put broken glass bottles on the road to stop the buggers – that’s what I did.’  Somehow,  this  was  the  truth.  Truth  just  needed  to  be interpreted by the believers who could find the answers themselves just  like  the  Fishman  had  done.  At  the  same  time  he  offered another piece of advice, which was, a smiling man would live for a very long time. And he did. A frenzied media from the bustling world of ‘ down South’ fuelled up, to fly back and forth over the mine in their helicopters like flies. unlike any fly, the journalists saw the Gulf through virgin eyes. It was  a  place  few  Australians  had  been  too,  let  alone  those  of  any other country tied up with the Gulf of Carpentaria. It was a world apart from their own. Anything in this new world could be created, moulded, and placed on television like something to dream about, or a nightmare. What stirred  their  souls  was  the  pureness  of  silence  and  the intriguing sense of loneliness each had discovered on their arrival in  single-engine  charter  planes  at  the  aerodrome  of desperance. There, hours could go by, and the only thing happening was the sound of the weather funnel rattling against a steel pole – Twang, Twang! Twang! under these circumstances, for the fascinated news people romancing the Gulf, no story became too big or too small, to give to the world. Televised on-the-spot reports of the dead ore body lying across the  ground  like  a  fallen  hero,  filled  the  TV  screens  across  the nation. Splashed into every news broadcast was a badly composed identikit  picture  of  Will  Phantom  which  bore  no  resemblance  to him. A lot of people in desperance started asking questions. They wanted  to  know  who  that  person  was  that  they  saw  on  television every night, who was running around calling himself Will Phantom. It was a good question, because mix-ups and things like that did not help, if desperance people felt they were complete strangers to one another, and they could not understand the truth of television. For mind  you,  they  were  still  recovering  from  the  shock  of  the  mine. There was a thin feeling in the air. A tension. It became as though anything could snap at any moment over the very idea of life itself. Anything could fall from a loose hinge into full-blown hysteria. The multi-million  dollar  mine,  from  infancy  to  its  working prime,  was  probed,  described  and  paraded  to  network  viewers. Interviews  and  footage  of  scenery  went  jig-jogging  along  in  soap opera  intensity,  before  finally  shifting  to  pan,  and  viewers  were encouraged  to  dissect  what  had  become  of  this  showcase  of  the nation.  They  watched  forensic  scientists  fully  covered  in  white protective clothing, risking their lives, hunting through the rubble. Who  could  even  breathe  while  watching  these  brave  men  and women  slowly  prod  through  each  piece  of  debris  in  this  solemn post mortem, carried out with the meticulous thoroughness of an ant? It became a televised spectacular, just like the death of an icon, woven with the interactiveness of Nintendo. Viewers could call up. They  could  hear  their  own  voices  via  satellite  and  underground cable,  coming  back  to  them  from  the  mine  itself  on  television.  ordinary people living thousands of miles away, who had no former interest whatsoever in the mine or its location, joined the growing  numbers  of  bereaved  viewers  gandering  at  the  still untameable, northern hinterland. The face of a scientist, speaking behind his glass-fronted mask with a muffled voice which had to be transcribed into e nglish on the bottom of the television set, like the SBS channel, became the anchorman for the task that lay ahead. on  the first day he reported that  a  fire  had  spread  from  the  main  transport  hangars  to  the fuelling bowsers. It was lucky no one was killed. on day two, the wash-up at the end of the day was like at the beginning, this was a major  explosion  in  the  remote  Gulf  of  Carpentaria  at  Gurfurritt, the  biggest  mine  of  its  type  in  the  world.  The  scientists  viewed viewing  what  lay  on  the  ground  were  trying  to  discover  what caused the explosion. There had been no fatal casualties. And so on. A fter a week of the hooded scientist, another bald, Mars-faced scientist appeared on the television screen. He was at home with a sad  expression  on  his  face  which  popped  out  of  fawn-coloured clothes. He gave the scientific explanation on the news: ‘The fire at Gurfurritt mine initiated from a grassfire. Spinifex exploded and the  intensity  of  the  fire  it  created  quickly  spread  to  the  bowsers. (Pause.)  This  caused  a  major  explosion  to  the  underground  fuel tanks.  I  understand  that  this  explosion  spread  through  the underground  fuel  pipes  up  to  the  mine.  This  action  quickly reached the main fuel tanks, which caused another major explosion, causing major damage to the mine and machinery. ‘ The  fuel  line  to  the  mine  operations  connected  to  the  main fuel tanks caused further major damage to occur. The intense heat rising into the atmosphere from the initial explosions generated a chain reaction of explosions throughout the mine. (Footage to air of mass destruction.) An incidental fuel leakage running throughout the 300-kilometre pipeline to the coast caused it to be extensively damaged.  (Pause.)  This  damage  was  caused  by  an  explosion throughout the buried pipeline which was only running at a third of  its  capacity  at  the  time  of  the  incident.  The  force  from  this simultaneous  explosion  uncovered  the  entire  pipeline  and  pieces were found many kilometres from their original site. (Pan shot: bits of  pipeline  sticking  out  of  the  ground  and  throughout  the surrounding bushland like an exhibition of post-modern sculpture outside the Australian National Gallery or Tate Modern in London on  the  Thames.)  At  the  end  of  the  pipeline,  there  was  extensive damage  at  the  dewatering  plant  where  storage  tanks  were destroyed.’ When the explosions stopped, the Fishman’s men picked themselves up  from  the  ground.  They  agreed  that  only  the  greatness  of  the mighty  ancestor  had  saved  them.  It  was  a  miracle  they  were  still alive after the earth shook so violently underneath them, they had thought it would go on forever. A heavy red fog of dust and smoke hung in the air as they moved away, their visibility limited to just a few metres. The fine dust fell slowly, and when it settled on those men who were trying to regain a sense of the enormity of what had happened, they took on the appearance of the earth itself. one by one,  camouflaged  by  dust,  they  began  spiriting  themselves  away, quickly, carefully, as dust covered their tracks, back to the lagoon of the dancing spirits. The  ancestral  trees  at  the  lagoon  danced  wildly  in  the  ash wind around the Fishman sitting on the ground staring red-eyed from weariness in the direction of the mine. He had been sitting in that position for hours visualising what was happening at the mine, waiting for his men to return. Their return seemed to be taking  forever,  and  those  extraordinary  followers  watching  the master, were making other rare discoveries. They were convinced that  the  Fishman  had  shrunk  in  front  of  their  very  eyes.  They were sure he was growing smaller and smaller with every passing second  of  precious  time.  The  chances  were,  if  he  continued  to shrink, there would be nothing left of him by the time they would be  compelled  to  flee.  In  this  perilous  locale,  they  nodded,  he would become an obscure beetle left crawling around the edge of the lagoon. It was true, Mozzie Fishman did seek obscurity. His instinctive trait was to crawl away from adversity, at least metaphorically, into invisibility  and  nothingness.  What  caused  this  peculiarity  of  his tangled personality was something that went berserk in what he called  his  stupid  brain,  whenever  he  had  anything  to  do  with white people. It seemed it was white people who could tug on his conscience, making him degrade himself like this. The truth was, Mozzie  Fishman  was  shrinking,  waiting  for  his  men,   Oh!  Great spirits  of  God,  let  there  be  no  casualties ,  he  longed,  moaning  to himself.  He  was  so  full  of  the  anxiety  and  shrinking  up  into  a beetle, he could not see the young men who ran through the bush hoping to evade capture, jumping for cover as skilfully as hares. Yet, on the other side of his mind, he fought like a rabid dog to  maintain  an  octopus  vision  of  himself,  where  all  arms  lead  to great  glory  and  success.  In  this  view  of  the  world,  there  was  no room for doubts to interfere with the great spirits of destiny whose permanent home was etched into the land itself, in this place. No one tampered with these arms of destiny which belonged only to Mozzie,  as  though  he  had  put  out  a  single  hand  to  catch  a  true stone  after  it  was  fired  from  a  shanghai.  His  general  mood  was downhearted  somewhat  and  forlorn,  yet  in  spite  of  the  world  of calamity  he  had  created,  he  felt  calmly  sated  as  he  sat,  alone  in contemplation. 
The vehicles left the lagoon in the early morning under Mozzie’s  orders.  He  had  sent  Angel day  with  them. Several  of  his  men  were  given  strict  instructions  to take Angel to any large city in the South where she would stay . ‘And  you  must  try  to  be  happy,’  he  told  her  as  a parting gesture of goodwill, although she replied that she had  no  intention  of  being  told  to  be  happy.  After  the proverbial dust had settled, he told her, as she finally stepped into a waiting car, he would come by. ‘Such is life,’ she sighed. With not one tear left to fall on a soaked hankie, only a premonition that her life  was  to  be  one  squalid  mess  of  moving  between  overcrowded houses from this point on, she resigned herself to a flicker of hope, because  Mozzie  solemnly  promised  as  soon  as  he  thought  it  was safe, he would arrange for her to go home. The  whole  convoy  was  ordered  by  the  Fishman  to  take  a route into a winter of nowhere. ‘Break up – as soon as you can,’ he ordered. ‘ do  not go home.’ He used many words to describe their new identities. They should become anonymous reformers with the run and mill. Blend. ‘ only regroup,’ he said, when his word arrived and some day surely, it would. These were his strict  instructions.  More  homilies  followed  like  prayers  so  the men  would  never  forget  that  only  by  following  the  Fishman’s word, letter for absolute letter, did any of them have a chance of invisibility. ‘Follow me,’ he warned with his one stern eye. ‘or else cop the consequences.’  Well!  That  was  that  then.  Consequences  meant  remembering how fish could get caught up in all kinds of nets, and you would know whose plate you were going to land on if you were regarded as  being  the  criminal  type  of  fish.  ‘Be  perfectly  assured,’  his warnings kept flowing, adding reasons because he liked reasons, in the belief that a leader could not have enough reasons stored up in his brainbox. ‘ I  am  not  talking  about  that  useless,  invisible desperance kinda  net,  I  am  talking  about  the  real  ones,  just  as  invisible, thrown out by the police who are wanting to squash people like you,  like  you  is  merely  a  nuisance  of  a  mosquito.’  He  was  still explaining his reasons, while one by one, the men got into their vehicles with whatever gear they owned, and drove off along the slow, difficult curvilinear road out of the valley, to the long, hard, short-cut roads into desert locations, so as to be gone from memory as though they had never existed. At  last,  the  Fishman  caught  the  first  glimpse  of  the  red-dustcovered  men  with  their  red  watery  eyes  emerging  from  the  bush after  they  had  travelled  by  foot  over  thirty  kilometres  from  the mine site. one after the other they fell on the ground where he was waiting  and  for  a  while,  they  all  lay  there  exhausted,  breathing heavily, saying nothing at all until finally, a voice rose from the mass of dust and smoke of panting bodies to say two words, ‘ done boss.’ The Fishman simply nodded as if there was little satisfaction to be gained  from  his  one  big  day  on  earth.  He  nodded,  as  he  went around solemnly patting each man on the back. Minutes later, the young men moved away and into the ghostly grey and red-streaked lagoon waters, breaking through the thin coating of dust and ash to uncover the fresh, cool water beneath. ‘Where’s Will?’ the Fishman asked, looking around. He knew he was not there, but he completed a headcount anyway. From the water,  the  men  looked  back  to  the  still  ash-covered  bush  on  the other  side  of  the  lagoon.  It  looked  as  though  no  man  had  ever walked through there, and it seemed unlikely anyone else would. Yet,  the  men  were  certain  they  had  seen  the  two  young  blokes setting off to the lagoon with Will. ‘We saw the three of them going ahead before any of us, we told them boss, “Take Will up ahead in case of any trouble”. But it was useless explaining. There was so little time to lose, and they still had some burying to do. This was what went wrong. Slowly, the report was given. A map was  drawn  of  the  location  in  the  mud  at  the  edge  of  the  lagoon. Two  crosses  on  the  ground  marked  where  the  two  mine  men guarding Will had fallen. ‘ Afterwards, after the explosions, we had to wait see, then we, a few of us, went back to find the bodies of those two.’ It was  true;  the  men  had  dared  to  face  the  scorching  heat where  the  devil  had  just  passed.  They  had  returned  to  the  flat, walking through the burning spinifex, trying to locate the bodies in the heat but had to leave quickly. ‘Look boss, there was no way we could find them. We went straight  to  the  places  where  we  saw  them  go  down,  the  bastards, and  they  weren’t  there.  They  were  gone.  Abracadabra!  Zoom. disappeared into thin air.’ ‘How could flesh and blood disappear into thin air?’ A sceptical Fishman eyeballed the tall-yarn spinners. ‘ What  we  were  saying:  we  thought  the  ground  swallowed them up and they went rolling down to hell. After we heard the explosion,  we  looked  all  around  the  ground  with  one  second, that’s all we had, true God. even in that time I swear to God, we never seen anything like it. The ground started to come at us, like the  skin  of  a  wild  animal  rippling  up  and  down  as  it  is  running along, with rocks jumping everywhere. Behind the ground moving, the dirt and rock went flying everywhere. Well! We had to duck for cover after that. We were flat on the ground and all we felt was movement  underneath  us,  like  the  devil  was  coming  up  to  the surface. ‘ And he was accompanied by the sound of the devil’s orchestra playing the horrible, sizzling music of hell by thumping their own heads together – Bang! Bash! Bang! We never heard anything like it. The sound was so terrible, we knew it could only be the sound of damnation. The only thing must have happened, the explosion lifted them up first, threw them to kingdom come, and when they fell, the devil took one quick look and said, “Curry them in hell, the buggers”. or, it could have been, they got buried themselves.’ The  tellers  of  tall  stories  were  given  a  cursory  glance  by Mozzie  as  he  continued  fidgeting  with  his  hands,  twiddling  his thumbs in circles, as though the action would conjure the simple truth out of a gammon story. But in the scheme of things, it did not really matter who was telling the truth. hey! yo ! Why tempt fate? No one here was going back anyway. Wishes were the only thing left . A simple  wish  was  all  anyone  could  ask:  that  wherever  they  fell, nobody would find the bodies until they were well and truly gone. Whispering again . Such a truthful mind running nilly-pilly, and so little control over his speech. Mozzie turned his gaze back through the rustling tree spirits to a spot where it seemed they were beckoning him to look, and he saw another truth in the blackened landscape. It was a truth he had seen earlier, as he looked towards the mine, at what had become of normality, as a spectator of this thing they called hell, and  seen  the  devastation  over  the  hills.  Now  he  saw  the  real immensity of what had happened in front of him, as if the only purpose of such a miracle was to brand him, small and inferior. Blown  bits  of  rose-coloured  human  flesh,  amidst  burnt  black cinders,  had  fallen  onto  the  ground.  At  that  moment,  seeing what he had, he wished it undone, but the terrible truth did not yield to the wish of a simple man. A   fortune-teller’s  time  sped  fast  over  the  same  ground where dingos, prowling in the middle of the night after he and his  men  had  gone,  were  taking  whatever  remained  of  those people,  scattered  over  the  plains,  before  running  and  snivelling back to their rocky lairs inside the hills of the great spirit. A tragedy kept  unfolding,  and  he,  unable  to  acknowledge  his  culpability, wished to hide in the smallness of men. He chose. He would not see the  extremity  of  his  weakness,  nor  claim  it  straightaway:  he referred  time  elsewhere.  The  Fishman  felt  a  dull  pain  again, pulling  his  heart  apart.  The  indecision  was  breaking  him  in  two. Now, he was uncertain if he should believe in his safe vision of what had really happened. did he need to know the truth? But the truth was, there would be no going back. Then, while the dark clouds of the Gulf crawled by, darkening the already hazy atmosphere, and cloud bellies touched the tops of the again windy bush, the attention was drawn of a young turk with the very best eyes, and respect for all religionalities among them, who  yelled  out  in  a  rasping  voice  like  a  Christian  crusader,  ‘In kingdom come, thy will be done. Thank the Lord, here they come!’ The Fishman peered over the rims of his sunglasses, and it was true  whether  from  his  good  eye  or  the  glass  one,  for  the  young followers were running, and others followed through the swaying branches of the spearwood trees. They were coming alright. The rasta boys,  under  ash,  with  Will  Phantom  stumbling  along,  half dragged by the sheer willpower of the rastafarian god men. Privately to the Fishman, the two young men, still winded by their efforts to return to the camp, explained in his ear what had happened. ‘We come along, like you said, and we are saying, “We are bringing the Fishman’s gift of life”.’ They said they believed Will  Phantom  was  just  a  man  wishing  to  die.  ‘You  better  off watching  him.  He’s  got  a  death  wish.  A  date  with  death.  Can’t stop him.’ ‘We should have left him there.’ The young blokes complained in  a  haughty  manner,  although  suffering  from  smoke  inhalation which hampered them from talking more, and burns. Will lay on the ground in front of them. explaining their difficulties, they said, ‘We could have been killed a half-a-dozen times because of him.’ ‘We want you to know he doesn’t listen to a fucking thing.’ Finally, they explained how he went back, they had to chase after him, while he looked for the two dead men from the mine. ‘We were nearly half baked alive, crawling on our bellies through a bloody spinifex inferno. You couldn’t breathe nothing but fire, all the while, trying to pull him out of there.’ Finally, exhausted, the  two  young  men  ceased  talking.  Ignoring  the  Fishman,  and bending over with their hands on their knees, trying to catch their breathe, both cast a hostile glance over at Will. ‘Yeah!  Yeah!’  The  Fishman  hurried  them  along,  anxious  to hear what else they had to say. ‘We found the buggers dead of course. We dragged them out of there, with clumps of spinifex exploding into flames everywhere you looked, and the bloody fire, chasing us.’ ‘ And!’ ‘ They are just over there.’ one of the lads indicated across the lagoon with a hand he barely lifted from his knee. ‘And we aren’t touching em again, neither.’ Fishman went over to Will and gave him a fatherly pat on the back. ‘Good job lad.’ He got him some water, then called some of the men to go and bring the bodies back from the bush. Soon enough, the two charred bodies were laid out at the feet of the Fishman. ‘ I guess we had better bury them,’ he decided. ‘We better get to  work  and  bury  them. over  there  in  the  bush,’  he  said  finally, looking back towards the road.  ‘No, we are not, we are not burying them at all.’ The Fishman looked  around  on  hearing  Will  speak,  and  saw  him  standing, completely  covered  in  ash,  dust  and  congealed  blood,  but  there was no doubt, it was the familiar Will Phantom’s easy stance. on first glance the Fishman was reminded of Norm some thirty years ago, standing in front of him with the same ease: calling it quits to their dual leadership on the religious road. ‘You remember elias’s boat?’ Will spoke quietly into Fishman’s ear – lest the wind heard and told the trees. Fishman nodded,  remembering  the  unpleasant,  hot  day  they had  found  poor,  old elias,  sitting  out  there  in  the  middle  of  the lagoon, and thinking he was there fishing, but knowing that dead men don’t fish. ‘ Well! What do you think, hey? If we get that boat from up the hill over there, and we leave those two there for the crows to feed on?’  Will  talked  on.  He  took  no  notice  of  the  look  of  concern growing on the Fishman’s face. The  older  man  had  shocked  himself,  when  he  unwittingly looked inside the charred skin of the two broken bodies that had been  dragged  one  way  or  the  other  through  hell.  There,  their spirits  lay,  unable  to  move,  as  though  locked  in  limbo,  and  from their heads stared frightened eyes which jumped left and right at every rustle in the bush to which Will wanted to condemn them. Instantly, deep sorrow moved Mozzie to forget his own grievances and  to  make  a  sober  decision.  There  was  no  thirst  for  revenge. Whatever  it  was,  was  quenched.  He  had  no  mind  left  for  the callousness  of  Will.  Instead,  he  replied,  ‘We  going  to  bury  em decent. decent. You understand me Will?’ ‘No, I respect you. You are the boss, but I got to do this,’ Will replied just as determinedly. ‘They killed elias. Left him here like he  was  just  fish  bait,  and,  yesterday!  Yesterday  they  killed  Hope. These bastards threw her out of the helicopter. And now, I don’t know  for  sure,  but  they  might  have  killed  Bala  as  well.  So,  I  am going up there to get elias’s boat, even if I got to do it myself, and I am going to leave them there to rot, until they are found by the people over there at the mine.’ ‘ eye for an eye is it Will?’ ‘Yeah! From now on it is.’ ‘You know what will happen if you leave them in the boat, don’t you? Their ghosts will come haunting you whenever you are in the water. Leave them in a boat and they will come rowing over any sea and throw evil at you until they kill you. So, now I am telling you no  more.  You  listen  to  me.  You  got  to  bury  them  decently,  no matter what they did.’ ‘I couldn’t  care  less.  You  will  have  to  kill  me  first  before  you bury  them  in  our  sacred  country.  If  they  got  holy  country somewhere for killers, well let the mine take them there and bury them  themselves.  This  is  our  own  sanctified  country,  not  theirs. They got no place here.’ ‘ Alright, have it your way, it’s your life. But I am warning you. You’d  be  better  off  picking  your  targets.  Leave  no  tracks  and biding your time. What can I tell you? I am only an old man. No use listening to me. What can I do? I got my only sons plus one other little fella I didn’t even know, to bury.’ Will looked on sympathetically while the Fishman continued talking, now that he was able to tell someone what had happened in desperance.  He  recalled  how  the  convoy  had  arrived  at  the lagoon, and while they were coming in, he was naming who came in  which  cars.  He  had  been  taking  careful  note  of  who  was driving,  their  driving  ability,  and  the  condition  of  the  car. everyone  had  set  up  camp  at  the  lagoon,  and  finally  now  the spirit  trees  knew  who  was  there,  you  could  see  something  was wrong in how they were dancing when the wind started to blow up suddenly like a telephone was ringing. ‘ It was a bad business what happened next. There was only a wind  talking  through  the  trees,  that  was  all,  then  all  of  a  sudden, everyone was saying, ‘What’s that? Sounds like engine noise.’ everyone was a bit worried because we know the sound our cars make. ‘ Anyway, a late car turned up. Seventies model Holden station wagon rode in flat chat, “Look out,” reckless driver and all, coming down  the  road  into  the  lagoon. did  it  belong  to  the  convoy everyone  was  asking,  and  I  said,  no  it  did  not.  I  knew  who  it belonged to, it belonged to the family of that silly, old troublemaker – Joseph Midnight, same man. So, I said to Midnight’s car, when it pulled  up  in  front  of  everyone  and  before  anyone  could  get  out, “You got no respect coming in here like this. I don’t like what you are doing here,” I told them.’ Will perfectly understood the significance of this story because everyone knew that old man Joseph Midnight and the Fishman had  nothing  to  do  with  each  other.  Both  were  like  his  own father  Norm  Phantom.  Stubborn  old  mules  who  anchored their respective clans in the sordid history of who really owned different parcels of the local land. Fishman claimed the lagoon, and not just the lagoon either. The old war went right up the coastline  to desperance  and  out  to  sea.  Will  remembered hearing  the  Fishman  explaining  that  he  was  the  living  bible  of all  times.  ‘I  am  pointing  to  my  brain,’  he  said,  pushing  his fingers  into  his  head.  ‘Inside  here  is  the  whole  history  of  your government. I can tell you if everything is correct, right back to when time began, before Adam and eve. I can tell you perfectly for  four  hundred  years,  the  Midnight  people  have  been  doing the wrong thing.’ The Fishman had taken Will Phantom out to the  spinifex  where  the  mine  was  to  be  built.  Following  the  old man’s  yellow  cat  eyes,  Will  watched  the  warring  spirits  falling from  the  skies  in  the  middle  of  the  night  to  fight  on  the  flat lands until close to dawn, before fading away. ‘I see everything,’ the old man said with the utmost sincerity in his voice. ‘And you come  along  with  me  and  I  will  show  you  because  I  have  been alive forever.’ When the mine was built it exacerbated the situation because it created a window of opportunity for Joseph and his family to start making Native title claims over the area. So, Fishman said, he told Joseph to his face, ‘If I see you anywhere around the lagoon I will kill you with a spear.’ old Norm did not get involved in the dispute but  Will  remembered  him  still,  slinging  on  about  those  greedy Midnight  pigs,  ‘trying  to  justify  whatever’,  in  a  long-forgotten string of accounts to justify the family feud. The whole lifestyle of old Joseph Midnight’s family grew into one sick family joke about pigs slopping around in their sty, waiting for scraps from the mine. ‘So, I told them Midnight boys before they had a chance to get out of the car – “You got no ceremony here. You got to go back to your own country. Joseph Midnight’s country is a long way off to the West somewhere, salt water and water buffalo where the wild people are living. Go and fight them if you are looking for trouble and you might get lucky enough to get your land back”.’ even in the light of a quarter moon, the Fishman said he was smart enough to see the frightened looks in the eyes of the young men, so, even while thinking he was getting soft in the head, he let them talk. A young voice from inside the car finally spoke. ‘ don’t get  hot  under  the  collar,  old  man,  we  will  be  going.  Grandfather sent  us  to  tell  you  something  and  we  are  sorry  to  have  to  be  the ones that’s got to say any bad news to you.’ Will understood when the Fishman paused in this story of his to talk about his premonitions before leaving desperance. He said he  was  no  angel,  but  he  was  listening  to  the  sound  of  angels singing like when you feel something bad is about to happen. All the  way,  while  driving  down  to  the  lagoon,  Fishman  said  he  did not know what it was, but his mind was in overdrive, waiting for something to happen. As he became trapped in the quagmire of his  imagination,  he  said  he  had  tried  to  gasp  one  single  image, but the kaleidoscope refused to come into focus. ‘It had to be in one of the cars – it was so close,’ he said of the sensation  which  gripped  his  mind  and  was,  by  now,  all  over  the place. All he could think was that one of the cars in the convoy was about to roll. ‘I stopped the cars must of been ten times, got out, and  told  them  off  for  not  driving  more  carefully.’ every  car  kept slipping through his mind, while he was trying to figure out who the spook was, not driving his car properly. ‘ Imagine that!’ he spoke quietly. ‘But it was too hard, I couldn’t see it because I had no faith in my own premonitions. They were the last ones – my own flesh and blood. It was why I could not see them, could not explain, could never picture their future, because they never had one. Poor little boys. ‘ So, the voice says to me, “The cop killed them, maybe. Maybe, Bruiser, too, because they both flogged them really terrible”. Well! I  know  what  Bruiser  is  like.  And  you  know  too  that  town  has gotten worse since the mine came. killed three little boys, babies really,  my  kids.  Stupid  Gordie  the  reason  being,  although  you can’t really blame him can you? Poor thing. I had to think then. Think about what was happening here. Think about why. Why my sons,  and  not  theirs,  killed  for  nothing?  I  kept  thinking  it  was strange how things were starting to happen around here – all since the  mine.  Strange,  how  ordinary  people  were  getting  killed,  I thought. Innocent people like children. My children. First time I can  ever  remember,  when  I  did  not  know  what  would  happen from one day to the next. We always used to know when somebody got  killed. know  it.  What  happened.  So,  I  said  to  myself,  where did it all start? First time, when they got rid of elias, because he was your friend.’  Will  nodded,  and  listened  while  the  Fishman  continued, reflecting  on  his  story.  They  walked  into  the  bush  and  finally, they were standing next to the three small bodies wrapped with blankets. ‘Bruiser, it had to be Bruiser,’ he said. ‘ I  think  Bruiser  killed  Gordie  because  he  started  to  be  too efficient at his job. Gordie must have had something on Bruiser, so he killed him, then he got the boys to make it look like they did it. I had those Midnight boys out of the car. My blokes dragged them out and made them talk. Well! They knew nothing about anything it  seemed.  They  said  nobody  knew  why  anyone  wanted  to  kill Gordie and everyone thought the boys did it. But you know Will, I  know  they  never  did  it.  I  wasn’t  much  of  a  Father,  but  they couldn’t have killed anyone. ‘ Well! Anyhow, I let those Midnight boys go home. Shouldn’t have.  They  were  pleading  to  join  up  with  the  convoy  but  I wouldn’t  let  them.  I  told  them,  “I  got  no  use  for  any  of  you  so you may as well go back to your grandfather”. All I could think of was the amount of trouble they would be on the road. I told them to go back to desperance, but they said their grandfather had told them to keep going. He said desperance was no place for  young  boys  anymore.  They  said  they  were  leaving  forever. They were heading South.’ The Fishman said he had selected a dozen young men to stay behind while he had the convoy move out and told them, ‘ even if I  don’t  get  through,  don’t  survive  this,  the  story  has  to  go  on. Nothing must stop our stories, understand?’ He turned away from the three bundles lying on the ground, and, as they walked back to the waiting men, Mozzie kept talking. ‘ I sent men out to the mine with my orders, then two young fellas  come  flying  back  with  news,  “ our  Will’s  over  there”.  That was alright, I sent them back to get you out, same time. The rest of us, we went back to desperance then, travelling slow and easy, not looking  like  we  were  on  the  warpath  with  anyone.  Silently,  like mice, we drove into  desperance, two cars in the middle of the day, driving up the main street. ‘ The whole place was deserted. No one took any notice what we were doing about the place. They probably are still trying to figure out what happened. We knew where they’d be alright. All uptown was inside the pub meeting, like they always have a nice meeting together.  Having  a  meeting,  when  they  want  to  talk  about something,  like  cleaning  up  all  the  rubbish  in  the  town  –  like talking about us mob. ‘Well!  I  said  I  wanted  to  be  a  fly  on  the  wall,  and  I  was,  so  I heard them. They was all there, jammed in like sardines, and they were  trying  to  figure  out  what  to  do  about  Truthful  going  mad inside the jail. So, I decided we would take Truthful too. But he was already  dead.  His  rope  was  still  swinging.  Sill  warm.  We  take  my boys  and  the  other  little  one  as  well,  and  all  very  quietly,  we  just slowly drove away and they were still having their meeting.’ Will  searched,  perhaps  half  expecting  to  see  the  body  of Truthful somewhere in the spearwood, or where the crows were perched  in  the  branches  breathing  in  the  odours  of  death,  or where the files were buzzing, but he only saw the black cloud of swarming  flies  hovering  around  the  bodies  of  the  blondie  and his  mate  Cookie.  Where  was  he?  Will  thought,  still  shocked  at what  Mozzie  had  said.  But  he  could  see  nothing.  Fishman thought  he  had  better  explain.  ‘ don’t  bother  looking  around for  him.  They  asked,  “You  going  to  bring  im  too?”  Meaning Truthful.  And  I  said,  “No  way  am  I  going  to  bring  im  down here”. His type don’t belong on our religious ground, anywhere near  my  boys  –  let  them  rest  in  peace.  So,  don’t  go  looking because you will never find him here. We left him in Bruiser’s house  –  that’s  where  he  is.  Sat  him  up  to  go  cold  on  Bruiser’s personal  reclining  chair,  waiting  for  Bruiser  to  come  home, singing  some  old dean  Martin  song.  Bruiser  was  going  to  be hearing that song forever, haunting him, whispering in his ears when he is lying down sleeping in his bed, for the rest of his life. No, I told the men, “Let them look after their own, and we will look after ours”.’ Fishman said his last words about what happened in desperance. ‘We never killed Truthful, and he never killed himself either, just like the boys never killed themselves. They were all killed by other hands, just like Gordie, and elias. The mine made killers Will, and now I’ve made the mine go away. May the great spirit show us some mercy one day, that is all I say.’ So, so, on Cloud Nine… The  men,  signalled  with  flicking  fingers  by  the  Fishman, worked  quickly  with  Will  to  bring elias’s  boat  down  from  the hills.  It  was  not  that  they  wanted  to   waste  time  helping  Will Phantom’s craziness . What did they have in common with someone wanting  to  extract  some  weird  kind  of  revenge? The  scum  of  the earth  lying  flat  out  on  the  ground  as  dead  as?   These  were  nothing more  than  a  couple  of  charred  corpses  that  should  be  buried with as much decency as the next person. Grumbling all the time about being used, like they were anyone’s , they thought they were something else now; a huge meta morphosis had taken place. In their new grandeur which felt like infinity, it was as plain as day that a special something had been defined out of their ‘what for?’ kind of half life, in so-called normal society. Their heads swelled with a greatness comparable to the once biggest mine of its type in the world, which they had conquered. It was as though the mine’s greatness had been pasted on their identity. It felt like they were  on  Cloud  Nine.  Now,  revelling  in  the   Star  Wars   theme  tune, which  they  were  softly  humming  as  jives  to  each  other,  these vigilantes were oscillating on the knife edge of some kind of madness in the ‘belly of the big fish’, where nothing could be assumed normal, and helping Will! Well! It felt like it was blunting the edge of their mania, and they did not feel this should be happening to them. So,  the  men  of  Cloud  Nine  worked  like  a  pile  of  snakes, dragging  the  only  concrete  memory  of elias,  old Choice,   through the woodlands and rocks  like a piece of desperance backyard junk. The  skip  skidded  through  the  unyielding,  thick,  skin-stabbing twiggy scrub. Their styleless contribution of labour, together with their noisy skylarking full of curses and bad language, had scared the living daylights out of hundreds of scavenger crows perched in the scrub. The birds soared straight up into the red ochre clouds, squawking and carrying on throughout their hurried flight, while others,  appearing  from  out  of  nowhere,  flew  in  untidy  flocks  to land. Clouds of birds fought each other for places to perch on the spindly  dry  branches  which  in  all  of  the  kerfuffle,  snapped  off close to the ears of the men who became so anxious to leave, they quickened their pace, until they saw the full red sun. When  all  is  said  and  done,  none  of  these  men  had  a  wish  to run about with death. death had its own air, and in this red haze, that unworldly air sang long, sacred vowels across the land. And while Mozzie’s men ran quicker to be away, they heard things they had never heard before. The ghostly poem, summoning the spirit tribes, swept past them as they moved down into the battleground of  the  spinifex  flats.  The  ode  unfolded  seasons  and  months  of wind,  rain,  storm,  sun,  night  owl,  swarming  flying  ants,  crows, eagles, dingos, dung beetles, flies, and fish spawning. All came in droves  to  claim  the  unprotected  spirit  until  only  bare,  bleached bones remained. ‘Be careful with that boat,’ Will demanded. ‘What for?’ came the reply. ‘It aren’t that anyone will be using it again.’ ‘ That’s not the point,’ Will snapped. It was not worth wasting words explaining family sentiment to the Fishman’s men.  once the green boat was moored on the shore again, Fishman came along to have a last glance at the killers. Above, a dark cloud of  sentinel  flies  –  dart,  dart,  darting  to  and  fro  –  pestered  their eternal  rest.  He  looked  at  the  dead  men’s  spirits  pleading  to  be released  from  inside  the  decaying  bodies.  With  a  deadpan expression on his face, everyone could see for themselves that he had lost interest in pleading clemency for them with Will. Within seconds, the men had plucked the two dead killers from the ground. ‘ okay boss? Heave Ho!’ They laid Chuck and Cookie in  the  boat,  side  by  side,  without  shedding  a  tear  in  mourning. Fishman looked, grunted his disapproval through clenched teeth stained with rolled tobacco, then turned his back and walked away. The  men  continued  the  task  without  thought,  and  anchored  the boat out there, fully exposed, by throwing a rock attached to a rope over the cathead, into the middle of the lagoon. Fishman led the way with a long stick, pushing along an ancient path  invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  heading  through  the  foothills. unquestioningly, instinctively, he was following a map etched on his mind from the times of the many fathers’ fathers before him. The men followed in his footsteps, each sending off little bubble clouds of thoughts into the wind, thoughts of faraway places, of people and noise, children laughing, and dogs running down the road  to  see  the  convoy  leaving.  They  threaded  through  golden papery  grasses  rustling  with  white  flower  tips,  through  flowing green-gold  spinifex  whispering  through  waving  coolabah branches,  and  silent  rock  faces  of  red  granite,  white  quartz, white-grey  quartzite,  all  looking  down,  watching  a  funeral procession for the children who marked a full stop in history. All three boys were wrapped in new, red tartan blankets bound with  rope.  Inside  the  blankets,  Fishman  had  covered  each  of  the boys  with  bunches  of  a  leafy  aromatic  herb  that  grew  wild  in  flat clumps over the red land. The strong tangy odour, similar to mint, spilled into the air to drown the smell of death. It was a strange sight of brightness and drab. Most of the men were still wearing Gurfurritt  good  quality  uniforms  and  boots.  Long  ago  they  had ripped off the long sleeves on the shirts, trimmed the long trousers to become shorts, immediately after they had finished up working for  the  mine.  The  lads  with  the  smiling  Bob  Marley  T-shirts carried the Fishman’s faithful port. The handle of the old brown fifties  suitcase  had  a  long  stick  threaded  through  it  and  they carried  it  ceremoniously,  because  it  was  an  honour  to  carry  the Fishman’s port. The port contained little. A few rolls of wire, a bit of a canvas, a butcher’s knife, a Swiss army pocketknife, spare matches, spare torch batteries, a small radio, a notebook and pen, and a can of Coke  he  had  forgotten  to  drink.  Several  men  carried  black billycans  containing  any  personal  belongings  worth  carting around.  They  walked  through  one  narrow  valley  after  another, and along a spring-fed river lined with dropping paperbark trees. The  going  was  slow  in  the  valleys  where  the  heavy  humidity caused them to perspire badly, and it ran off them like water. The men  knew  what  they  had  been  told.  They  would  carry  the  boys far into the hills to a cave where their journey would end, and the boys would begin their own journey, and when their destination was reached, they would live in a state of harmonious coalescence with their ancestors. The journey  continued  for  many  hours  without  rest,  until  at last, the Fishman stopped. He told the men to wait behind, ‘Settle yourselves a while,’ he said, pointing to a fairytale grove of gidgee trees  where  the  air  was  so  still,  you  could  swear  you  heard  the daydreams  of  lazy  lizards  sunning  themselves  on  the  branches. This was the first real break in over eighteen hours of moving west, away from the lagoon. The men watched Mozzie go on alone, until he  disappeared  into  the  hills  where  the  only  things  living  were dingoes and marsupials. down onto the ground, he crawled on his belly into a smelly dingo’s lair hidden by grassy tussocks, turpentine scrubs and wild banana vines. From the distance, the men began to hear an echo of bell-like voices wafting down the strange grim faces of the hills. ‘How could dingoes make such a sound?’ Certainly, it was more than one voice. ‘ Sounds  like  cats  caterwauling  somewhere.’  They  listened, some asking, expecting more trouble, what could be happening now? ‘Listen! Strange words? Listen!’ ‘Smell that?’ ‘It’s all the dingoes around here.’ ‘Stop ya  cavilling.  It’s  him.  Mozzie’s  speaking  a  different tongue,  a  dead  language,  talking  to  his  passed-away  relatives. Tribespeople were shot here.’ For  a  long  time  they  stood  waiting.  Time  passed.  They  sat down and waited, and more time passed. They dozed off under a weak shade. They woke up hungry from waiting. These were good men consumed with thoughts of how long they must wait until, one by one, everyone started to relax again. They stretched out long fit arms  and  legs,  comforted  by  the  resounding  echoes  of  Mozzie’s voice.  Finally,  he  ended.  A  long  silence  emanated  from  the  grim hills, and the men rose to their feet, and craned their necks towards the cave, trying to see if something had happened. Some of the men threw glances at Will Phantom, seeing what he was going to do, whether he was going to help the Fishman or something. Noise or silence, nothing had bothered Will Phantom. He  was  still  sitting  like  a  sad  statue,  staring  off  into  space.  Small colourful finches bobbed around the ground at his feet, drawing in those who watched them, until, someone who had not been paying attention to the finches, suddenly said, ‘Look at that.’ Two small green-feathered birds, no bigger than mice, jumped from twig to twig in the nearby grass. rare birds. rare find. Night parrots. The reward was discussed, but no one was interested. When Will heard their  voices,  he  raised  his  head  towards  the  kingfisher  he  heard flying overhead, and with the other raised eyebrows following his, they watched its flight path, heading north towards the coast. Soon  enough  Fishman  was  heard  coming  back.  He  came gently swishing and swashing, pushing aside the twiggy scrub with his stick. It was time to go, he announced in a dignified voice. The boys were carried up, and passed through the dingo’s lair into the red-ochre-walled cave. The solemn young men went into the place where only the old people had gone before. once inside, past the dingo’s  entrance,  the  cave  opened  out  to  the  one  large  room  of towering red walls. on the floor of the cave lay a heavy coating of dust  which  when  moved  by  their  footsteps,  flew  into  the  stale air  like  red  powder,  revealing  its  antiquity.  They  saw  small pieces  of  animal  bones,  old  broken  glass,  rusted  match  tins, ancient stone tools – grinding stones, spearheads, axe heads, all perfectly executed in their manufacture. The ceiling left evidence of fires, of those who had come and cooked and slept beside a fire, back, back and further back in time, one hundred thousand years of dreams, ascending in smoke that rose to the ceiling and stayed there in a dense cover of soot. And the walls, they screamed at you with the cryptic, painted spirits of the dreamtime. And inside the walls, was the movement of  spirits,  moving  further  and  further  forward,  so  the  surface appeared  to  be  falling  into  the  frightened  eyes  of  the  Fishman’s men. They all stood there inside, crowded like that. old Fishman was  in  another  world,  crying  and  talking  the  dead  language, walking around, gently pushing past anyone standing in his way. His  staff  pounded  on  the  living  wall,  and  the  men  looked  away, down at the dusty floor, before seeing the Fishman moving forward through  a  narrow  opening  inside  the  resting  spirit’s  body.  The entrance  must  have  been  there  already,  but  it  was  impossible  to have noticed it, because the cave seemed so crowded and occupied with relics from other times. The song cycles’ arias of devotion that had droned on in this place for days and days like locusts before rain,  which  came  from  forever  in  the  old,  musty  air  inside,  were heard now. The men felt the sound lingering inside their heads. So, it was with astonishment and awe, these men gaped at what they had been shown, and allowed themselves to be taken into the powerful  spirituality,  which  was  somehow  the  same,  but  much older  than  the  ornate  cathedrals  made  with  stone,  or  the  monasteries and places of worship to relics of bones and other bits and pieces of sanctified saints of old europe and the Holy Land. Like some old wizard, Fishman turned back, to indicate with a wave of his stick that the men should follow him. The sombre procession continued onwards into the depths of the creature of the underworld’s belly, into the people’s past. The Fishman kept the  march  moving,  undaunted,  and  waved  his  staff  left  and right,  as  they  proceeded  down  into  the  labyrinth  of  strange corridors in the dimly lit cave, where essential rays of light came tapering down like roots of trees, those of the desert fig tree, or the fat bottle trees, all twisting their roots through cracks in the rocks in search of the cool moisture far, far below. They moved past  bones  of  the  deceased  laid  to  rest  on  rock  ledges,  or hemmed into crevices. others leant against the wall in a sitting position,  as  though  they  had  brought  themselves  to  their  final resting place to die. using the eveready torch, kept jammed inside his trouser belt, the Fishman led the way. Behind him, the men followed, carefully watching their steps in the darkness, trying not to slip over the wet rocks  in  the  calcite  world  of  dripping  limestone.  Inside  these chambers, it was a world of cymbals and chimes, children’s music reaching  further  on,  deeper  into  kilometres  of  underground watercourses  feeding  the  spring-fed  paradise  far  above  in  the world of sunshine. Finally, their dark, shadowy figures came to a full stop behind the dull light of the torch. ‘ Well! This is it,’ announced Fishman. The men, bunched up behind him, were stunned by what they saw in front of them. on the other side of the small opening, the torch shone across a large underground  sea.  The  open  sea  was  so  large  rippling  waves skimmed across the surface. A breeze filled the darkness. In the ray  of  torchlight,  silvery  white  seagulls  with  scotopic  eyes  that could  see  in  the  darkness,  were  piercing  the  green  water.  The birds  were  feeding  on  a  species  of  fish  the  men  said  they  had never seen before. Shallow shafts  glowed  intermittently  from  dim  faraway  lights which  were  the  stars  of  this  world.  The  men  listened  to  Mozzie’s gravelly,  inharmonious  voice  continuing  his  nocturne.  Perhaps  it pleased  the  spirits  that  at  least  somebody  had  come  along  to demonstrate his pietism to the old world. There did not seem to be any other side to this water world. What’s  this  place? each  had  thought.  The  zealots  were  simple people, and they found it difficult to adjust to this world which Mozzie  had  kept  from  them. once  they  had  familiarised themselves to the darkness, and explored further, they found a jetty. Glow-worms lit its edge. All along  the  stone-carved  mooring  were  well-constructed paperbark canoes resting, it seemed, from antiquity. each craft was covered in gull droppings and cobwebs. From the bow, a grass rope moored the craft to another cobwebbed rope appearing snakelike up through the water. No one would have been able to guess how long  the  boats  of  the  dead-language  people  had  been  floating there.  Many,  many  centuries,  perhaps.  The  men’s  recent  grand feelings  of  having  saved  their  traditional  domain  had  now  been completely eaten away to a bundle of raw nerves. What if we invoke the  dead  being  in  this  place ?  someone  whispered,  and  it  must  have been heard by everyone, for they were all startled, as though the question had been screamed at them. No one uttered a word. ‘Where’s Will Phantom? Where is he? Land rights! Is he here?’ the Fishman suddenly demanded, as if he had no time left in the world, as if they had to get going, high-tailing it out of the place. Will appeared from the darkness, and moved to the Fishman’s side. The  old  man’s  face  glowed  like  a  peaceful  beacon.  Will  began helping  by  pulling  in  a  canoe,  positioning  it  beside  the  flat  rock harbour,  holding  it  steady  so  the  Fishman  could  place  his  son inside. others  started  to  help,  just  enough,  so  Fishman  could perform  the  ritual  of  placing  the  children  himself.  It  was  his responsibility. Will joined the three canoes in a line, one behind the other, with the rope. He was surprised to find the rope was still as supple  and  strong  as  the  day  it  was  made,  possibly  thousands  of years  ago. did  it  take  aunties,  grannies,  mothers,  sisters,  sitting together working the reedy grass in a day of clear blue skies with sunlight on their hands as they talked about living things around them? This was what he said to the Fishman as they stood side by side looking at the canoes, rocking steady like cradles, ready to take the journey across the sea into perpetual night. The old man said he was thinking it was about time to go, to take the boys across, ‘I got to make sure they learn the language so they can get on.’ Will said that was right, it was time to go, and he gently tossed the rope he was holding, let it fall out in the water, instead of giving it to the hand held out to receive it. ‘You  did  everything,  and  they  are  going  in  peace  now,’  Will said,  with  a  protective  arm  steadying  the  old  man,  and  both watched, as the three canoes moved away from the mooring in the swiftly moving current. Silently, the men stepped forward to pay their  respects  to  the  canoes  drifting  silently  into  the  darkness, before  turning  to  walk  away. up  ahead,  they  heard  the  cavern echoing  with  the  Fishman’s  voice  bouncing  from  wall  to  wall, penetrating their blood, saying his goodbyes to his sons. Wishing them well in their new world. Be good boys . He would put his own affairs in order, then he would be coming back to them, very soon. ‘Luke Fishman, Tristrum Fishman, and you too, Aaron Ho kum.’ He explained he had adopted this dead boy as his own flesh and blood forever, brother to Luke and Tristrum. only  Will  heard  it,  while  leading  the  Fishman  away,  when  he looked  back  over  his  shoulder.  ‘Hear  it?  Listen!’  He  heard  a droning  sound,  and  imagined  the  sound  was  converging  from many different directions. The sound he heard, was as if someone a  long  way  off  was  playing  a  stanza  on  the  didgeridoo,  then, others  responded  with  their  own  version  of  the  melody  which went droning on as one long prophetic oratorio. Fishman said he had heard it too. ‘Listen!’ He dug his elbow into Will’s ribs. Will looked back and in the blackness, using his eyes like a cat, he saw the  seagulls  gathering  together  like  a  glittering,  silvery  cloud over the canoes. He saw how the beating of scores of wings could create its own air currents until the waters rippled and splashed into small groups of white capping waves. In the company of the cloud, the  canoes  moved  away,  navigating  the  routes  to  the  spirit  world, across the sea. ‘ Is  it  the  spirits  of  the  old  people?  Coming  to  take  them home?’  Fishman  asked,  knowing  Will  could  see  far  through  the darkness. ‘ Yes,’ said Will, while he kept the old man moving along in the direction of the others ahead. Soon, he would have to take the lead and  navigate  through  the  maze  like  a  bush  animal,  retracing  its steps. There was trouble at the entrance. Will cautioned the men to stay  back.  Through  the  caverns  came  the  amplified  howling  of dingoes,  resounding  from  wall  to  wall,  bouncing  through  them, running down the streams of waters under their feet. ‘ Wait  here,  and  I  will  see  what’s  happening. keep  an  eye  on the old man.’ Will moved ahead. He would be a fool to rush forward, tricked into taking the wrong direction into the maze by the reverberating sound. He judged that the entrance to the first cavern had to be much further away than the sound indicated. After fifteen minutes of  navigating  by  memory  alone,  he  not  only  heard  the  plaintive howls,  but  smelt  the  overpowering  stench  of  the  small  den  laced with  urine  markings.  He  edged  his  way  forwards,  as  near  as  he dared  to  go.  He  did  not  want  his  scent  to  be  picked  up  by  the dingoes, since he knew it would frighten them out of the den. Then he  heard  the  sound  of  droning  engines.  He  panicked, believing he was surrounded by men who were not dead, who had known exactly where to find him. He felt suddenly trapped in the catastrophic darkness, and compelled to burst through the lair and run, to rush outside like a savage animal. When they had heard the helicopter coming, the dingoes had taken refuge in the lair. Then, as it started to hover close to the entrance, sending clouds of dust inside, they had backed themselves into a frightened pack against the  wall,  and  started  to  howl.  Their  sharp  ears  were  unable  to tolerate the vibrating noise of the helicopter at close range. As Will watched  them,  almost  lying  on  top  of  one  another,  he  knew  very soon they would run. Moments later the helicopter was gone. When the sound was far enough away, he went through to the dingoes’ lair. Straight  away the animals  gave  him  a  startled  look,  stopped  whimpering,  then shot  out  the  entrance  and  into  the  bush.  He  saw  the  helicopter heading  east,  change  directions,  completing  a  search  grid  from north to south, and heading further east to turn, before repeating the pattern. ‘ Jee-sus!  They  are  onto  us  already.’  Mozzie’s  men  were  now assembled on the side of the hill, watching the helicopter making its progress in the distance. ‘How did they know we were here?’ ‘ I  don’t  think  they  knew  anything,’  Will  said  thoughtfully. ‘I think they just landed for a piss in the bush,’ he said, pointing to some  turpentine  scrub  nearby  still  dripping  urine  into  the  wet ground. ‘It was just coincidence that’s all.’ ‘ They could have been tracking us,’ Fishman added, trashing the bush with the stick. ‘No, I don’t think so. I don’t think they would have been able to get anyone local to help them. In any case, I covered our tracks coming  here.  There’s  nothing  any  two-bit  tracker  from  miles around would be able to pick up from us.’ ‘ Are you sure?’ There was a persistence in the Fishman’s voice. He was thinking about his own tracks, and the trail he had made, swishing with his staff. It was a good sign for Will. Fishman was back  on  board  with  the  living,  thank  goodness,  covering  all corners. Finally, he had pushed back his preoccupations of grief. The men openly smiled their relief. What remained of Mozzie’s convoy stayed in the vicinity of the cave  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  They  slept  soundly.  Their  dreams proved  good.  This  was  how  it  should  be,  Mozzie  gave  his  men dreams of youth, good marriages and many children. Afterwards, when the evening sky was full of storm clouds fieryblue  from  the  red  sun  setting  low  on  the  horizon,  several  of  the men ventured out into the hills to hunt. The first to return said he had gone through the spinifex ground, and nearly collided with a large  female  red  kangaroo  nibbling  fresh  spinifex  shoots.  He explained in detail how close he was able to get to the creature, and how he was about to spear it in the heart, when the animal turned and looked at him with eyes like the softest creature on earth, and he  felt  sorry  for  it  and  let  it  go.  Ahhh! kangaroo  meat  was  good and they were very hungry: but if one must starve for love of an animal, this was understood. The second hunter returned from the rocky hills and he said he had seen a large red female sitting on a rock ledge, cleaning its paws.  Ahhh!  No.  ‘I  looked,  and  this  kangaroo  was  not  cleaning itself at all. It had its paws together because it was praying, and on its left shoulder it had a big scar in the shape of a cross.’ He said he followed it for a long time because he was hungry, but decided he could not kill a holy creature. He explained, he felt good. He felt like living it up. And let it go. An ashen-faced  Will  also  returned  empty-handed  from  the hills. Strange, but nobody asked since he offered no story. He sat down. He told Mozzie he had seen Hope playing in the hills with flocks  of  finches.  He  believed  she  was  leading  him  away,  always staying far ahead, while looking back to see if he was following, but never letting him come close to her. She was in a hurry, heading back in the direction of the dark purple storm clouds up towards the coast. ‘ And the finches kept flying towards me, and they kept going south. There, the hills were plentiful with food in the paradise land of  the  water  people. down  in  the  river,  bream,  barramundi, grunter, swam through the clear waters, turtles big and small were passing by, floating on top of the water through lotus leaves, and the spear men came home loaded.’ All  evening  Will  went  outside  to  check  on  the  helicopters searching further away to the east, with searchlights, flaring down across  the  country,  from  north  to  south,  and  back  again.  He counted at least six helicopters in action and smiled at the cost of modern  technology.  It  was  the  darnedest  thing  he  thought, ‘Who’s going to find us? We know this country like the back of our hand.’ Fishman came out too. ‘I can hide for weeks and nobody is going to find me. I can disappear like a puff of smoke if I want to.’ This  was  the  unofficial  search.  Highly  confidential.  The Gurfurritt  boss  already  knew  the  disaster  at  the  mine  was  no accident.  He  knew  it,  had  a  hunch,  picked  it  as  foul  play  in minutes,  and  acted  on  it.  Within  hours  of  the  Fishman  and  his men disappearing into the hills, the bodies were found in elias’s boat  on  the  lagoon.  Spilling  had  a  sneaking  feeling  about  this, and went straight to the lagoon. Imagine that. Graham Spilling swore blue murder for Chuck and Cookie. ‘Son of a gun if I get my hands on the black bastards,’ he thundered all the way back to the helicopter. His words were as solid as bricks. He called the people who paid him. ‘No police! No one, hear me, go calling the fucking police up here. don’t talk about this to anyone. Fucking media can piss off.  remember  we  are  mining  men  and  mining  men  look  after  their own and mining men keep their bloody mouths shut. We are going to catch these bastards ourselves.’ He said this, word for word, after the orders had come all the way from New York, from the very top of a skyscraper, to Graham standing in a muddy lagoon surrounded by a cloud of flies. The  mobile  phone  screamed  instructions  into  Graham’s  ear and  his  face  whitened.  Strange  how  a  skyscraper  in  New  York could cast spells like magic. It could keep a whole floor of workers occupied  with  knowing  whether  every  single  switch  was  up  or down on every last monitoring device on Gurfurritt operations, in the spinifex mind you, on the other side of the world. It could cast a security net over the whole social reality of desperance, keeping tabs on how much food was in the fridge, who had just replaced a light  bulb  in  town,  or  monitor  the  pulse  rate  of kevin  Phantom lying in a hospital, while he was trying to figure out whether to live or die. It could rock the town this way or that to make stories. It could burn the Council office down, burn the Queen’s picture, to gauge  the  reaction.  Well!  As  luck  would  have  it,  timing  was everything this time of year. Fishman and his men were saved by a  stroke  of  nature  from  early  detection  by  the  helicopters. even the afternoon rainstorms could beat the monitors in New York. When midnight  struck,  the  convoy  prepared  to  set  forth  on their long journey west, through the gibber stone desert, following the dreaming, the Fishman said, as he slowly sniffed the black air outside the cave. In the flashes of lightning from distant northern storms,  he  looked  across  at  Will  Phantom,  who  was  also concentrating on the weather. Both had been thinking about the low-pressure  system  building  up  in  the  Gulf,  sensing  it  in  their bones  as  something  different.  Seriously  different,  according  to Fishman, twitching his nose in the air to catch the scent of rain coming out of the gidgee trees. The  men  were  eager  to  leave,  to  get  moving  to  avoid  the millions of flying ants crawling out of their mounds in the ground. Fishman  pointed  up  to  the  sky  with  curled  lips,  and  announced flatly,  ‘There’s  going  to  be  floods  round  here.’  Scattered  clouds, moving  unusually  fast,  were  pouring  inland  as  though  they  were being  pushed  from  behind  by  some  gigantic  monster.  Flocks  of seagulls  had  left  the  coastline  and  were  heading  inland.  Also screeching,  inside  these  formations,  were  cockatoos  and  galahs flying, gliding, south with the coming winds. Fishman looked at all the  birds  flying  overhead,  lost  in  the  darkness,  bumping  against each  other,  and  said  matter-of-factly  that  it  would  not  be  long before the helicopters would need to land, ‘ or be brought down by the birds.’ ‘ or the wind,’ Will replied. ‘ Well  then!  What  are  we  waiting  for  men?  Let’s  get  out  of here.’  The  men  were  relieved  to  be  finally  on  their  way,  even  if they were caught in the rains. The faster they moved inland, the further away they would be from the full wrath of the sky spirits, hitting  the  high  country  before  the  floods  rushed  through  the rivers and gibber plains. ‘W ell! old man, this is where I leave you for a while,’ Will said, tapping Fishman on the shoulder. ‘I’m going back up North. You know I got unfinished business to deal with. You got the men here old man, they will look after you. You’ll be alright.’ ‘ I am not worried about the men looking after me. The Law is the Law and the Law will be looking after all of us. What about you?’ ‘I will catch up to you later on, I promise. or else, I will be here when you come back. depends on how long it takes. I got to go and find out what happened to Bala. I can’t do any more than that right now.’ ‘ okay lad,’ Fishman gave Will one last look. He knew only too well that Will might never return if he went chasing the spirits of his  family.  He  started  the  departure,  ‘West,  due  south-west.’  The group of men followed, the pre-storm bush emanating a steamed pungency of bloodwood and herb grasses ahead. The tracks they followed were the very same as an underground river  several  kilometres  wide,  travelling  from  one  side  of  the continent to the other. And Fishman, traveller of the big dreaming, countryman  and  water  diviner  all  in  one,  sensed  the  presence  of water far underground, and knew exactly where he was headed. By  dawn,  they  had  become  invisible  to  the  eye  of  search  parties near and far, combing the local bush around the region they had left, for nothing. Angel day thought she should have stayed at home. Travelling with the convoy was harder than most people could have imagined. Her longing  to  return  home  began  almost  instantly,  once  they  had crossed  the  rail  bridge,  on  the  road  out  from desperance. even then,  it  was  too  late.  Mozzie  refused  to  take  her  back.  Her  face winced  with  every  bump,  as  she  went  on  questioning  herself  for leaving.  She  never  lost  the  look  of  somebody  who  had  made  a mortal mistake. Now, with nothing else to do but sit in the back seat of  the  white  Falcon  heading  south,  she  searched  until  she bellyached for a reason why she could not have been happy enough to stay in desperance. Invariably , she would be reproached by the same answers. even Mozzie said that she wanted to leave because she could not stand the  place.  ‘Wasn’t  that  your  story?’  He  had  to  take  her. oh!  No doubt  about  it:  what  a  mistake  that  turned  out  to  be.  Norm Phantom  had  always  known  something  that  Mozzie  had  never learned. Angel day was not a lady, but a queen. Queens make men awkward.  Men  unaccustomed  to  waiting  on  somebody  hand  and foot were going to come a cropper with Angel. Abandoned  in  the  white  Falcon,  driven  by  crazy  boys  who looked  like  they  had  never  driven  a  car  before,  Angel  was  not impressed  that  Mozzie  had  not  bothered  to  come  up  the  road himself  to  say  goodbye  to  her.  The  whole  situation  had  become intolerable  and  she  told  this  to  the  three  lads  in  the  front  seat. They did their best to ignore her. Orders were orders, babe . Hoitytoity  bitch,  they  glanced  at  each  other  with  raised  eyebrows. Although  she  was  flattered  with  the  word  ‘babe’,  she  found neither  of  the  overgrown  boys,  or  the  unbelievable  situation Mozzie had placed her in, the least bit engaging. She remembered sweet-talking Mozzie, right up to the moment they had left desperance, trying to convince her it was going to be like the holiday she deserved. Now then – where was he and where was she? Little fish come into the dish. Without a word, he had sent the convoy of cars off. She was told by strangers that they were taking  her  to  see kevin  in  hospital.  She  thought  about  young kevin, the promising kevin, then the big boy kevin who disobeyed her. kevin  who  destroyed  his  life  for  nothing.  She  had  not  seen kevin in years and she had no idea why he was in hospital, and if he was, it was no concern of hers. Her eyes fumed as she watched the boys in front escaping into the world of reggae. She questioned Mozzie’s choice of drivers. Why these three? Were they all like this? Laid-back, the three hummed to the song of ‘Buffalo Soldiers’ in another people’s world. Soon they were in cruising mode, slumped into the front seat in almost subliminal comfort, while Bob Marley’s mesmerising  voice  rose  from  the  dead  out  of  a  dust-ingrained cassette player.  Why  did  he  send  her  with  those  negligent  boys?   Talk  was  talk. he wanted her out of the way.  everyone knows talk. he  wanted to get rid of her.   Finally,  one  day,  having  put  the  whole  puzzle  together  on the  ground,  Fishman  mused  with  self-congratulatory  quickening of  speech,  ‘Stand  back  now  and  let’s  look  at  the  picture.’  See! them  little  boys,  they  took  the  wrong  track.  Consequences  are what consequences are, and, the white Falcon fell into the hole of a devilish place. only the shamefaced boys returned eventually to personally  explain  to  the  Fishman  what  had  happened  to  the Falcon. Fishman was correct. Just like he said, they had fallen into the most devilish place on earth.  Let’s  look  at  the  exact  location  on  the  ground  where  Angel day’s spirit landed. Some say you can still see it there, waiting for her to come by to reclaim it, in order to return home. The white Falcon  was  speeding  all  the  way  to  the  big  mining  town  where Angel was to go, according to the story. But that never happened. The boys had young minds, not innocent minds, just simple minds flooded with bitter experience. In the last moments of the journey in the Falcon, heading up towards  the  main  bitumen  road,  coming  off  the  dirt  within  the speed limit, the boys explained, ‘We were going along all fine like.’ Something happened, the dreamy boy driving hit the brakes at the crossroads.  But  the  car  did  not  stop.  Instead,  the  steering  wheel spun to the left, and the car crawled along the side of the road that goes through many towns with a pioneer history, until it finally hits the big lights of the eastern seaboard. This was not the road to the right,  that  led  to  the  mother  of  all  mining  towns,  and  another state border beyond. The boys, excited by the Falcon’s powers of persuasion,  quickly  spun  a  new  version  of  the  Fishman’s  orders for going to ground. ‘Won’t be long now and we will be in town,’ the driver, a curlyheaded  boy  with  hooded  eyes,  told  Angel,  while  trying  not  to glance  at  her  as  he  looked  over  the  back  seat.  He  turned  and looked back up the road. The other two pushed each other out of the car, stretched their long, skinny limbs, yawned, and moved off into the bush. From their back-to-front peak caps fish heads with strange eyes stared off into the dry wilderness behind, over the car, and back towards the Gulf. Angel stayed in the car, but watched as the  boys  casually  made  their  way  up  a  hill  overlooking  the  town. one boy was wearing a navy singlet and work shorts, the other, a rainbow-coloured reggae T-shirt and shorts. Both wore thongs but had no difficulty walking up the gravel hill to the lookout. The place  they  headed  to,  was  a  sortie  for  young  lovers  who drove there in the middle of the night, and accidentally conceived their first children. It was the town’s highest point. A summit for broken-hearted people taking a lover’s leap. It was a place where myths  sprung  from  nowhere  and  claimed  the  deeds  of  the  nextdoor  neighbour  who  might  have  or  might  not  have  pushed somebody  over  the  top.  Modern  literary  skills  adorned  the pinnacle. Curt messages painted over public signs told the story of the town to the whole world passing on the highway . kill All Coons, or similar, left on the hill for posterity’s sake. Angel told the boy driver she remembered Mozzie calling the racist slur on the top of the hill the white man’s title deed. ‘He said it  was  the  white  people’s  way  of  desecrating  Native  title  written underneath. Mozzie said he had seen the real story when the old people showed it to him.’ It was etched deep in her mind how Mozzie hated that town. He  never  had  one  good  thing  to  say  about  it.  He  said  he  would never go to that town again and told everyone else, if they had any sense, they would do the same. Her silence made the boy feel tense. He  looked  up  the  hill,  wishing  his  mates  would  hurry  up, wondering what was keeping them. It would only take a minute to drive  through  if  it  was  all  clear,  and  head  on  towards  the  coast. They  had  already  decided  to  head  down  to  a  southbound  city: Brisbane, Sydney or Melbourne and get lost for a while. It was like the Fishman said. For  the  life  of  me,  what  was  keeping  those  two?   He  did  not  say anything to Angel but he thought of the last time they went up the hill. They had been driven there after the local constabulary had picked them up in the middle of the night. They were kids really! Aboriginal  kids  who  should  never  be  caught  in  a  flash  of  a torchlight. Caught! It was like roo hunting for whoever looked for young  blacks: Who  needed  to  be  taught  a  lesson.  understand .  Before they get too big for themselves.  The boys were dumped first. The young girls were dumped miles out of town for a bit of fun. The girls went home and cried rape. it was only a bit of taunting.  This was a big town and things like that did not happen in there . We taught them a lesson. ya can’t call that rape. Get out of here.  Their families living black on the edge of town found justice was to send the girls away – it was the only way. They said: We don’t want any more trouble. The police  let  the  boys  go  on  top  of  Lookout  Hill.  The  boy tapped  the  steering  wheel,  remembering  how  they  looked  down and saw the town lights shining. He and his mates had been left to defend themselves against a party of drunken hoons. The families came  in  troubled  cars  and  took  the  three  boys  home,  cut  them loose,  and  sat  them  down  on  old  newspaper.  Then,  everyone pitched in and bought bottles of methylated spirits and bottles of kerosene,  and  bottles  of  vinegar,  but  nothing  was  enough  to remove the whole drum of tar stolen from the road works, and the feathers from pillows the white boys found in the back of their ‘love vans’.  He  did  not  tell  Angel day  the  story  of  how  their  naked bodies burned. His fingers paused on the steering wheel as the lad saw his former self like yesterday, screaming in agony at the burns unit in the local hospital. The boy did not tell Angel, and she must have thought he had nothing to think about, sitting there, not saying a thing. Nor did he tell her this was the reason why Mozzie took him in the convoy, and the two still on the hill. Bad thoughts should be interrupted, and his were by someone screaming – Move! Move!  He and Angel both heard  it,  and  their  eyes  were  instantly  drawn  up  the  hill.  He gripped the steering wheel, ready to drive, all of his instincts telling him  to  escape. up  the  hill,  they  saw  the  other  two  lads  running, slipping and falling in the loose gravel, both faces looking wild. The whole world was screaming – Move! Move!  It was too late. He could see the police car already, speeding up the road, coming straight  towards  them.  It  braked,  full  stop,  beside  the  Falcon.  A swift inspection of the unregistered vehicle determined their fate. Well!  Well!  Well! you boys  are  coming  with  me. The  three  boys  were arrested on the spot. Angel watched in silence while the uniformed men dragged them away in the back of the police car. one policeman came back to the car and casually looked in the window at the back seat. Angel’s heartbeat soared, she was certain it was beating against the roof of the car. She looked nervously at the cold eyes that seemed to be looking up and down at her and along  the  seat  of  the  car.  She  clutched  her  handbag  on  her  lap because she expected to be dragged from the car too, and if it was the last thing she was able to do, she needed to take her handbag with her. The policeman said nothing, and went around to the driver’s side of the car and pulled the keys out of the ignition and left. The police car drove away. Angel sat  wondering  what  she  should  do.  Would  she  wait  for the  boys  to  return?  She  considered  the  prospect  of  walking  into town by herself. Walk into a town she did not know? Impossible, she  answered  herself.  What  an  absurd  thought.  How  could  she walk into town? White people would stare at her. Who would help her?  She  did  not  know  anybody.  What  to  do?  What  not  to  do? She looked at the bitumen road – left or right. But the more you look  at  bitumen  the  more  it  tells  you  to  move.  Move!  Move!  Just like  the  boys.  She  wished  she  had  never  left  home.  There  was nothing left for her to do but to wait with all her memories until the future collected her. She sat in the empty car. She brushed her hair, spending so much time on it like a cat preening and thinking minute thoughts. She cleaned her face with the remains of a bottle of mineral water. She applied new lipstick, the colour of congealed blood, and the sight of it in the mirror made her jolt. She saw blood in the mirror flowing  from  her  two  boys,  spilling  on  the  floor  in  the  jail.  She would  never  know  what  happened  to  them.  Mozzie  had  spared her the pain. After some time reflecting on her image, sitting and waiting,  not  knowing  what  to  do  next,  she  decided  to  leave  the car.  Her  plan,  now  that  the  heat  of  the  day  had  passed,  was  to hitchhike down the western road to the big town where the boys were supposed to take her, and wait for Mozzie . if  he comes. if  he comes.  A heroine’s plan either way. She would arrive after an hour in a fast car. Who only knows how long it would take by foot. one kilometre she walked in her high heels, and not one step more. The phantom who had her soul in a bag, came sidling up to  her  again, Wanta  lift  doll? She  thought, Doll!  Well!  Precisely. That’s  more  like  it .  She,  leg-weary  already,  never  gave  it  a  second thought  and  she  took  the  lift.  Her  fate,  bizarre  and  twisted  it seemed, had arrived out of hell, in the form of a shiny, black road train,  hauled  by  a  Mack  truck.  Truckies  inside,  of  course. Fishman’s men called out her name at the crossroads, having just arrived  themselves,  noticing  her  walking  up  ahead,  but  it  was already too late. The engines of the big truck drowned out their horrified voices like they had been made by little ants. Their lives went off into another story. destiny often visited the foot-walkers’ convoy during the night in dreams. The men were saying they had seen Angel day living in the  worlds  of  their  dreams.  They  explained  to  the  Fishman  that they saw her whole life ahead of her. She lived for several years – decades if the truth must be told, yes. Yes, it was true, Angel now lived unhappily in a devilish place. She would never see the bright starry nights of the Gulf country again. They were painful dreams encompassing  some  mysterious,  windy  world,  where  dull  silver strips of tarnished-looking fish glistened in salt under an overcast sky. rows  and  rows  of  these  snakelike  fish  hung  on  lines  drawn over the land, which swayed to and fro with the breeze as far as the eye could behold. Through this grey country many sad children, some  who  looked  like  herself,  others  who  looked  like  people  she had never known, came and went. How did this happen? Praise for Angel day  fell  easily  from  the  lips  now.  She  was  a  sensation  who dreamt far above the heads of other people. People cried and shook their heads in sympathy to the Fishman. They paid their respects. You were never supposed to see the look of a deserted woman in those jarring eyes. They sang her praises to each other. She who looked like a lurid wish come true, who had once  walked  with  hips  swinging  in desperance.  She  was  like  a trophy  for  best-kept  town,  most  beautiful,  best  presented,  the biggest fruit of a blessed season. Certainly, certainly, it was the most painful  memory.  Yet  a  burning  candle  for  her  face  stayed  in  the world of local memories. She disappeared  into  another  world  as  simply  as  looking through  a  hollow  log  and  having  no  idea  where  the  porcupine went  after  just  having  seen  him  run  through  it.  Poof!  It  was unbelievable that  a  living  creature  could  just  disappear  into  thin air. In the end Angel was lost. Lost on the long road to nowhere. Mozzie  Fishman,  unable  to  leave  his dreaming  road,  never  went after her. A spiritual man could not just go galivanting around the world when he had his business to attend to. It was natural that outside the sphere of their world she became hearsay  in  their  lives.  Some  strange  person  amongst  the  zealots who never dreamed, claimed he received a letter in his mind, and took it at once to Mozzie Fishman. He read what was written. Angel day, he read, now lives indifferently to her surroundings, alongside a fast-flowing tidal river in a cold country which was a mystery to him.  The  green-grey  foul-smelling  river,  carried  along  severed heads  of  domesticated  animals,  fruit  crates  from  bustling marketplaces, rotting fruit and vegetables thrown into the river as waste, corpses of white people whose lives had not been considered by anyone to be worth two bob, and the broken-hearted wares of many centuries of a poor civilisation. It was plain to see, Angel day had gone overseas. The letter  read  that  Angel  shares  her  home,  an  abandoned grey  warehouse  with  a  moss-covered  grey-tiled  roof,  with  others like herself who had lost trust in humankind. Sometimes on dull, grey  cloudy  days,  thousands  of  grey  pigeons  assembled  from nowhere, and choked for space on the roof. Since it rained all the time, there was rainwater leaking into the building through holes in  the  roof  and  gushing  along  rusty  pipes  and  spilling  out  onto green  slimy  floors.  In  the  night,  it  was  no  good.  The  warehouse people went to bed as soon as darkness fell. They slept almost on top  of  each  other  for  warmth,  huddling  together  under  damp stacks of old, rotting clothes. every  day,  Angel day  sneaks  away,  disappearing  through  the morning  mist  like  a  ghost,  leaving  very  early  before  the  others remove themselves from the tangle of clothes they had crawled into like rats. And in this fashion she goes to work. There, before dawn, she joins numerous others, too many to count, standing in lines like sticks  of  chalk  along  the  wet  marshes  of  the  outgoing  tide. even Fishman  acknowledged  he  could  sometimes  hear  them,  flicking their  strange-looking  lines  of  plastic  rope  along  the  waters. Fishman said he felt that close to Angel, he would turn blue with a cold he had never experienced before in his life. Time and again, he  said  he  tried  to  ask  her  what  she  was  doing  there  but  she ignored him. Then, when some complete stranger came along and asked  her  the  same  question,  she  replied,  ‘Fishing  for  snakes.’ otherwise, she would have offered nothing. Words were the enemy of the twilight world where she lived. No  one  bothered  speaking  in  her  world,  except  to  answer  a stranger. every day, Mozzie watched until Angel’s line resounded with the twang and thrashing about of waters which others, being more experienced snake catchers, were already making. Then, he watches her smile as the slippery snake, like an eel, starts to wind itself  around  the  line  and  climb  up  towards  her  hand.  Stealthily, she flicks the snake off the line into a wicker basket and closes the lid.  Again  and  again,  she  flicks  the  line  back  into  the  emptying marshes, seemingly, unaware she stood in freezing water. When the  grey  tide  receded  and  the  waters  were  still,  Angel knew the snakes had gone far out to sea and it was safe for her to move. She wades through deep water to go home. She goes past a man with a transportable aquarium. He drives his truck with the aquarium  that  is  so  large  it  fills  the  back  of  the  truck  and  is  the height of the driver’s cabin. The water is full of grey fish. People pay  the  tall  man  to  see  the  fish  by  throwing  money  into  his upturned grey hat on the ground, but Angel looks for free. once she reaches the warehouse, she sits in the sun until it fades away, just to put some warmth into her freezing body. Nearby, there are two  intertwining  trees  outside  the  warehouse  and  all  she  thinks about  is  Fishman  or  Angel. eenie,  meenie,  miney  mo,  whose dream? At the first sign of darkness, a hidden old owl hoots  from some hole hidden in the branches. Angel runs away to hide while the frightening owl of the plains flies with luminous plumage. No one could even imagine a world with sea snakes flowing in tides, and freezing  bodies  asleep  in  damp  caverns  of  clothes  where  glowworms lived. But this was how he read the letter. It felt pretty special to be told any news of a lady like Angel day although it was hard to imagine her new life. The zealots made up new stories to send to her. She could be like the owl who shone in the  night  if  she  slept  in  a  damp  place  and  became  covered  with phosphorescent  larvae.  Perhaps  her  cave  in  the  mountain  of clothes was once a palace, glowing with light. The  Fishman  exclaimed  to  anybody  in  the  world  that  he never knew a woman called Angel day, whoever she was. ‘ don’t send letters to Mr Fishman.’ Letters were only from whitefellas to other  whitefellas.  ‘And  what  am  I?’  He  was  a  blackfella.  No  one had any business addressing any darn letter to him, he said. 

Unlike an estuary fish… The single shrill cry of a wind-swept bird startled Will Phantom and he stopped dead in his tracks just to listen to it. The poor bird cried continuously as it was  pushed  further  and  further  away  in  sheets  of misty rain. on his journey back to the sea, this was the first time he had stopped walking since he had left the Fishman. Perhaps all it had been was a seagull flying low overhead, adrift  from  its  flock  and  in  shock. up  to  this  point  Will  had forgotten  to  think  about  anything  else.  The  need  to  eat  or  sleep had evaded him as surely as though he was no more than a song sung  like  an  estuary  fish:  a  pelagic  salmon,  single-mindedly travelling against the flow, or a barramundi being tugged by some invisible thread, to struggle back to the sea. Will  lost  his  concentration.  Nothing  but  single-mindedness, the only lifeline he could fathom, had let him travel so far and so quickly against all sensible logic. But as he looked for the bird, he was questioning twenty or thirty fathoms deep in the unquestionable: What on earth was he doing heading into the wall of the cyclone? He looked in vain for the bird, for it had been blown away by winds it could no longer fight. There was nothing to see from looking into the skies except a towering blackness of clouds heading across the  coast  –  smack  bang  over  the  most  improbable  of  all  coastal towns, desperance. As he stood on the wet grassy slope, he described the sound. It  had  been  a  simple  sound.  A  child  could  have  made  a  similar sound.  In  his  mind  he  tossed  around  many  things  it  could  have meant. Could he go so far as to say the bird was pierced with fear? Hesitating, he thought again. Why should anything be so terrible to have pierced a harmless creature with fear? He decided to settle for something more to his liking. He scaled down the underbelly of paranoia. It was not that bad. It was more like the simple sound of incredulity. What did it matter? It was enough to have heard it. He had not heard the likes of it before. All day and night the wind played ancestor music. The sounds rolled in the skies, gathering up the waters of the ocean in heavy clouds,  whistling  while  they  passed  through  the  sodden  spinifex grasslands, screaming through rocky ledges of the highlands and through the gorges where the twisting river tracks led. Will would sleep deeply, when he fell. His dreams were fitful and broken by a maddening  array  of  missed  opportunities  clambering  over  one another  for  prominence  in  his  thoughts.  He  awoke  from  these dreams in a totally exhausted and depressed state of mind, telling himself he had to move on. The cry of the bird was the luxury of turning one’s back on the roar  of  churning  seas.  This  was  the  sound  which  all  species  on earth  must  flee  from  when  they  hear  it.  Now,  since  he  heard  the piercing  cry,  Will  grew  more  conscious  of  the  wave  trains  in  the Gulf  basin  piling  themselves  up  onto  the  distant  shores  ahead  of him.  He  felt  his  body  fighting  against  the  lunacy  of  his  mind’s determination to move on. He swayed forward and bent into the sea winds blowing over the  coastline  and  heading  all  the  way  back  over  the  hills  from where he had come. He tried to look back through the mist as far as he could, but although his vision was extremely limited, his eyes travelled ten dozen kilometres more through the wet spinifex hills. The  magnificent  hand  of  the  wind  pushed  into  his  back,  and  its song  whistled  into  his  ears  like  a  devil,  and  into  his  mind.  It threatened to blow him back into the hills, where in the distance, he clearly saw the Fishman leaving his mind and walking his men into the landscape, as though he was just moments away. Yes, it was so. The old man was safe and leading his men along another path. A windless track heading inland in a westerly direction. on  the Fishman’s track, Will heard the sound of a classical Japanese  song.  It  poured  into  his  soul.  He  could  see  the  song was  being  performed  by  a  mythmaker  fly  with  operatic  voice, creating  impromptu  notes,  as  it  circled  around  the  Fishman’s head. Accompanying the fly, traditional flute music flowed from Fishman’s battery radio over the homelands. The landscape of stunted  spinifex  clumps  and  gidgee  trees  mutated  through distance,  slid  from  note  to  note,  into  mystical  patterns  of  a garden of the orient under morning dew. The Fishman’s men in broken jeans, shorts and T-shirts faded and holey, followed through the dry riverbeds, gracelike behind the old man with the radio, in a travelling mirage of grey brolgas at  one  with  the  universe.  Will  yearned  to  rejoin  their  sense  of lightness. Fishman smiled to the world, as though everything was easy.  Then,  as  though  he  too  had  caught  a  glimpse  of  Will standing alone, close by, he called out: you can catch us if you are quick, come on  Will . For a few brief seconds, Will felt his whole body teeming with a desire  to  give  up,   Go  on,  go  back ,  urging  him  to  return  to  the Fishman. He began to calculate how long it would take: ‘Possibly five minutes. Less even.’ Instantly, time seemed so unessential, any accomplishment  could  be  squeezed  into  it.  Will,  realising  some things, like this, were easier said than done, knew he was falling victim to his own failings. A crushing sense of defeat stopped him in his tracks. He felt exposed. Sprung by his own carefully hidden deficiencies.  Weak.  No.  He  thought  he  was  piss-weak.  And  the world saw him for what he was: traitor to the family. Here was the crisis point. So arrived the hand of his father, pressing him on the shoulder. Aaah! Breathing a sigh right next to his ear as though saying: ‘What do we see son?’ Again, invariably, he knew Norm’s face  was  behind  him,  looking  out  where  he  was  looking  with huntsman’s  eyes.  Will  saw  his  father’s  presence  in  his  dreams where Norm was always standing behind him like his own shadow, looking  searchingly  at  the  back  of  his  head,  deciding  – Do  you match up? Locking him into a duel. Will turned, concentrating his attention ahead to Carpentaria. If he was to be a member of his homeland  he  knew  he  could  never  afford  a  Mozzie  Fishman distraction. There could only be one road. He wiped the vision of ever wishing to return to the Fishman’s haven clean from his mind. Light  rain  flew  horizontally  from  the  mist  hung  in  clouds hugging  the  hills  against  the  wind.  He  saw  through  all  this, navigating  the  atmosphere,  like  a  fish,  where  predetermined knowledge  dwelled  from  a  world  full  of  memories,  told,  retold, thousand  upon  a  thousand  times  from  the  voices  of  all  times, through  his  father’s  voice.  ‘A  homeland,’  a  great  creation  site covering these hills, ‘this is the story of…’ that somehow, Will felt, was creating the tension he felt in the air. In tiredness, even in dreams, he sensed a mysterious change of great magnitude was taking place in the wetted atmosphere, and in vain his mind swam the depths of the ocean calling for Hope and Bala.  Half  dreaming  of  the  sea,  he  saw  the  water  circulating  in huge  masses  hundreds  of  kilometres  wide  and  as  many  fathoms deep,  become  moving  columns  of  water  passing  over  and  under each other. Nothing stopped. Not a single drop. He was breathless from  the  simplicity  of  all  that  he  saw,  and  continued,  finding  his path through the machinery of water. Somehow  he  knew  he  was  being  prepared  for  change, instinctively,  like  an  animal  sniffing  the  air  and  sensing  danger approaching,  sensing  a  quickening  in  the  atmosphere,  sensing the future of a place. He wondered if indeed, he did carry a sense of knowing. If he would dare to describe a premonition as akin to that  of  the  thousands  of  pelicans  that  had  sensed  unseasonal change happening to parts of the inland salt-lake country from a place a thousand miles away unaffected by the rains, and took the chance.  He  and  the  Fishman  had  once  stood  by  the  flooding desert waters a month after heavy rain and watched the pelicans that  had  flown  inland  from  so  far  away  to  breed,  and  like themselves,  momentarily,  had  abandoned  the  ocean  waves  of their life. He  thought  about  something  else  he  could  not  see,  a  smell perhaps,  travelling  in  the  breeze,  which  might  have  triggered  a single vision in the minds of perhaps a quarter of a million sea  gulls, who had  without  doubting,  taken  flight  and  headed  towards  the flooding lakes carrying fish that had fallen like food from the skies. This  was  the  root  of  ultimate  trust  he  thought,  the  knowledge  of intuition,  of  understanding  the  vibrations  of  subtle  movement  in the environment. Birds, acting in unison on this slim chance, like a  note  struck  on  a  piano,  and  no  different  to  himself,  a  simple creature after all, were sealing the fate of the next generation. He continued walking through the dew-covered grasses and the  mulurru-turpentine  bush,  towards  a  rocky  ledge  to  see whether he could gain a closer view. There, while standing at the highest  point  before  making  his  descent  to  the  mud  plains  far below, the mists parted. For several moments the doors were ajar on desperance and the sun streamed down on the town. From his estimation of the distance he still had to travel, he hoped to be at desperance by dusk. Yet, in this simple uncovering, Will Phantom also glimpsed the town’s psychosis twinkling in the sunshine. He sighed at the malady of  small  white-town  madness  creating  another  eyesore  to  feed itself.  Irritated  he  asked  himself:  Could  nothing  change  down there? He knew his cynicism about desperance was cruel compared to its naive innocence, but unlike his father, Will deliberately strove not  to  be  caught  up  in  the  butterfly  net  of  thoughts  which monopolised,  hypnotised  and  tantalised  the  eyes  of  the  world, especially Pricklebush. He knew one thing and in this, he remained steadfast. He did not want to grow old saying his role in life was to be a watcher in the long grass of uptown. The busy, industrious, toiling residents of desperance had been up like the larks, dressed in woodchopping gear, a brush-stroke image of  working  Australiana,  straight  off  a  Pro  Hart  canvas,  chopping down  the  remaining  few  poor,  poor  old  trees. every  man  had  his chainsaw. dozens revved. Mango trees – Baaaarrrrrzip! Cedar trees – raaaarrrrip! Poinsettia trees – Zipped. What would you give for this tree? Such magnificent trees, decades in the making, were once shade in long, bright, burning summers. Poof! No joke. Straight out, lying now, down without a lie, cactus-smacktus, holus-bolus, flat out on the ground. This was called: The Great Bat Drive . Will whispered to himself the name the town had given to the annual ritual when tens of thousands of fruit bats, Pteropus scapulatus  – as thick as flies and fleas  if  you  please, flew  up  the  river  towards  the  coast  and,  having circum  vented the net, descended like a plague onto the town. When Will Phantom was a boy he saw the dog responsible for this madness. Never had there been a dog alive so consumed by its own stupidity . So, good job, serves itself right, it died from a bat bite – so say  all  of  us .  Apparently,  the  dog  belonged  to  old  man  Joseph Midnight, but when the bat bit it, he said it never belonged to him at all. It was Norm Phantom’s dog, he claimed. It was unnatural for a dog to attack a bat but it happened because bats and dogs were both too numerous for a small place like desperance, so they were bound to collide. When  the  dog  and  bat  bit  each  other,  the  bat  flew  away precariously, this way and that, lopsided like a drunk, all crumpled wing, with dog flesh in its teeth. The dog had immediately fallen on  the  ground,  legs  up  and  howling.  It  looked  as  though  it  was having convulsions. The dog suffered immensely, with a fever so great,  perspiration  was  dripping  from  its  skin,  froth  from  its mouth, and its eyes bulged from its head. No one would touch it. By  this  stage  a  crowd  of  people  had  gathered  around  to  look. Then, when the dog rose from the ground everyone pushed back: Back, back and give it room.  So, keeping  well  out  of  its  way,  they  watched  the  dog  rage, whilst wobbling with jelly legs, up and down the main street. Then, out of the blue, Will had gone straight up to the dog and killed it right in the middle of the road in front of everyone, by bashing it over the head with a stick. He might have taken it home if it was his father’s dog, but it wasn’t, it was only old man Midnight’s dog, so, what the heck? It didn’t matter. Instead, he took the injured bat home and made a juicy barbecue of it on his little campfire down the back. All the Phantom kids ate it. In town though, the bats had made a reputation for themselves after the incident with the dog. All kinds of legends jumped out of the woodwork about bad bat bites. elaborate stories circulated on paper  from  the  Council  about  the  effect  of  falling  bat  urine  on human skin, of inhaling bat spit, or of bodily contact with bat fur, and with so many years passing since Will killed the dog, a little bit of suspicion had gone a long way. Bats were high on the town’s list of  things that can go wrong in the world.  everyone now believed bats carried a deadly disease. A disease which could spread to humans through the treasured fowl pens: if you looked closely. Nobody really saw bats anymore. Showers of bat piss caught the imagination  instead.  Nobody  walked  the  streets  at  night  during the mango season because nobody had any trouble visualising the deadly virus pissing on the town. Poor uptown kids crying every night,  could  be  heard  right  down  in  the malirriminji- Pricklebush camps: Don’t make us go to sleep . Seven o’clock at night fearing the whole town would be found dead in bed the next morning. It was a sad, sad, self-perpetuating sad town. Nobody had any idea how those kids grew up so fearful of the world and everything. So that was the origin of the bat and the dog story. Witnessed and  assimilated.  No  one  ever  bothered  to  claim  the  dog,  so eventually, it was removed by the Council. That too was one of the  local  proverbs  that  lived  from  the  story  and  Will  Phantom gained  a  reputation  as  being  a  violent  person.  Someone  who would  strike  another  as  would  a  virus,  was  how  Will  Phantom was interpreted through the bat and dog story. The retelling of Will in up town was as vivid and as crystal clear as hearing that original, fatal Thud!  on the dog’s head, through those reliving it all again. And again: it  sounded just like this, Thud!  Will remembered when he was a kid how he responded to the talk of the town. It had  made  him  feel  destined  to  be  out  of  kilter  with  the neighbours  but  he  loved  his  persona.  For  fun  he  ran  up  and down up town  singing  ‘ dirty deeds done dirt  Cheap’.  So, whatever he was suspected of, and suspicion fell on him far too easy, it was because he was always seen through eyes tainted by this one significant story. So, the  great  bat  drive.  Shotguns  were  fired  into  the  air, firecrackers crackled, more chainsaws kept the noise up, and the occasional explosive let off by Carmen, the fish and chip lady, who sometimes  doubled  as  the  pyrotechnic,  shook  the  ground.  All  of this was reminiscent of previous encounters between the town and the bats. The drive would last a whole day, until either uptown ran out of Panadol tablets for their headaches, or the bats became tired of  flying  in  circles  around  the  town,  trying  to  land,  only  to  be exploded back into the skies in showers of their own stinking urine, their  tiny  brown  eyes  looked  longingly  back  towards  the  river. Finally,  flying  away  from  the  destruction  of  fallen  trees,  they headed  up  the  river  corridor,  following  the  freshly  open,  pale yellow river-gum blossoms that filled the air with a sweet honeyscented  perfume.  There,  they  would  eat  and  expel  a  foulsmelling,  pungent  gum-blossom-aroma-like  shit,  as  they  moved all  the  way  back  up  to  the  freshwater  springs  and  rock  caves, several hundred kilometres inland. It was  incongruous  that  with  a  clear  view  of  the  enormous clouds swinging across the coast, which ought to have been enough warning for anyone on earth that a cyclone was heading their way, with winds that would strip the trees clean of foliage, so that they might end up looking like bones with branches sticking out of the earth  forever,  the  town  chose  instead  to  turn  a  blind  eye,  and continued with the ceremony of belonging it had created for itself. The sounds of uptown and the thoughts of watery births clashed into each other in Will’s mind, as he started his descent from the hills.  The  white-flowing  curtains  of  misty  rain  continued  to  blow across his path. Frequently, in the flight overhead by flying foxes, seagulls, sea birds large and small flying inland, he saw a cyclone bird,  the  spiritual  messenger  of  the  ancestral  creation  serpent. This  big  black  bird  was  the  ultimate  signal  that  a  big  rain  was coming. The noise of the town faded away in the clouds, and the sound of  the  wind  blowing  the  mist  became  more  prominent,  as  Will Phantom ploughed on down to the muddy road which he would follow until he reached the town. He still had many kilometres to travel,  and  walking  the  straight  road  to desperance,  he  again became  absorbed  by  thoughts  of  finding  the  beautiful  face  and body  of  Hope  swimming  under  the  water,  always  moving  ahead, her long brown hair flowing back. At times, he felt so close to her, he  thought  if  he  could  reach  out,  he  would  be  able  to  touch  her hair.  So  close  was  this  vision  he  held  of  her,  and  always  just  a moment out of his reach, he was convinced she was urging him on to the place where they would finally be reunited. He spoke to her, reassuring her he would go any place of her choosing. He saw their reunion in the blue of a sea desert, and he was convinced she and he would be alive in this place. The optimism  of  this  reality  felt  so  near  to  achievement,  he almost  fell  after  it  when  it  disintegrated  and  disappeared  in  the wavering of mist closing like light curtains in the flickering of the breeze.  He  rethought  their  reunion,  trying  to  capture  some unapparent feature in the flat ocean of the vision he had just seen, to pinpoint a location, a direction to travel. Nothing resurfaced of this broken dream. The images could not be properly remembered or held up for scrutiny like a photo of a place, or a map. Hours  passed  while  he  continued  on,  fiddling  with  his daydreams,  until  new  sounds  interrupted  his  thoughts.  The distraction  was  the  rumbling  of  tyres  churning  through  mud coming towards him along the fog-blanketed road. realising the cars were coming from the direction of the town, Will stood back, and listened. He heard several drivers doing what they ought to know you cannot do: drive fast over the claypan roads when they are wet. He knew  instantly  the  town  was  evacuating.  The  Bureau  of Meteorology  had  called  and  translated  the  message  from  the ancestral spirits. drivers were panicking because they could not get out fast enough. The wheels of cars were spinning out of control as they  spun  sideways  in  the  mud,  sending  them  off  into  the  green slime  sludge  on  the  side  of  the  road  where  their  engines  roared even louder, as their wheels churned up mud, spat it out behind, and became hopelessly bogged. He could hear people yelling – Shit on it, AND fucking get that fucking, rust bucket, useless jalopy out of the fucking way or i  will fucking run over ya.  It was like that and so forth. Turpentine bush and spinifex grass growing on the side of the road and spreading across the mudflats with nothing taller in sight, were as good as a tumble weed for camouflage, so, some distance from the road, Will stood like a shadow in the mist. It was too late to move, but he was almost out of view of anyone seeing him, as the sounds of the chaotic exodus from desperance closed in. Suddenly, the red light on the roof of the police car spun rays that hung lines of red smoke through the mist, then the motorcade burst through the clouds. An  ashen-faced  Bruiser  drove  the  police  car  he  had commandeered from the empty police station. Beside him sat the schoolteacher, danny real,  looking  like  he  was  about  to  die.  Will was close enough to notice that Bruiser was carrying a shiny blueglass  rosary,  threaded  through  the  hand  clutching  the  steering wheel. The siren screeched, but his glassy blue eyes were firmly fixed  on  the  road  ahead.  In  the  deafening  racket  of  the  siren, Will could now plainly hear the car horns beeping and honking right back towards desperance. Blue car after red car, all-colour cars,  shapes  and  condition  filed  down  the  south  road,  all  filled with  the  frightened-face  folk  of up town  absorbed  by  worries  of flight. They had left without a single glance back. Their fearful lips recited  prayers  loudly  in  closed  cars.  Nobody  looked  at  the  rainbathed  countryside.  All  eyes  were  on  the  road.  Cars  impatiently honked their horns. drivers panicked for their car to be ahead of the one in front. everyone shouted for others to move faster. Will watched the people, the kindest to the meanest, with heads in  and  out  of  their  car  windows,  screaming  wildly  at  the  ones  in front  to  get  a  move  on. We  will  all  end  up  dead  because  of  you.   The drivers in front yelled back saying how they could not go any faster, and  along  with  a  string  of  abuse  claimed: you will  kill  us  all  if  you don’t shut up . He saw the people of desperance who had never in their lives gone down this road before, sitting quietly in their cars, apparently  accepting  the  fate  of  the  mystery  road. other  faces, planted with shock by the thought of having their personal dreams and hopes doomed, stared into space. He saw most people had no time to gather anything to take with them except their most valued possessions.  The  family  dog  in  a  Catholic  family’s  car.  An  old ginger cat. Many carried the prized desperance roosters and hens. Last, towards the end of the motorcade, came a string of Aboriginal families in uncles’ cars, a red and black Zephyr, a cream and tan Ford  Falcon,  and  sun-bleached  Ford  Cortinas  of  dull  blue, squatting  low  and  spurting  exhaust  fumes  into  the  mud.  Cattle trucks  followed  behind.  In  the  back  sat  all  the  old  people,  some younger  men,  but  mostly  women  with  children  –  all  of  the Pricklebush mob now – chanting and singing. Inside the  back  of  the  very  last  truck, old  Joseph  Midnight slowly rocked from side to side. The truck was churning along at a snail’s pace. Aboriginal driver, Will tried to remember who he was: Chilla!  Chilla  something  or  other,  Mooch.  Moochie.  Middle-aged fellow always wearing one of those blue peaked caps. Moochie had been working real hard. You could tell from the mud-stained singlet he was wearing over his fat belly. The main ordeal was over as far as Moochie was concerned. Face like a codfish and casually smoking  his  cigarette.  He  looked  like  he  was  the  only  person prepared to accept the conditions of the road. Moochie was talking about how many times over the years they had  been  told  by  the  white  people  –  ‘ oh!  Yaah!  Another  cyclone coming. We are all going to end up dead one day, you wait and see.’ ‘You get sick and tired of them telling you that,’ he yelled as if he was talking to the whole motorcade, although he was only talking to someone called Fish. ‘ People up town telling you, looking at wese  living – “Ah! Ha! one  of  these  days  you  are  going  to  get  ripped  apart”.’  He yawned,  attempting  to  pacify  his  already  pacified  passengers sitting up in the cab of the truck. Fish chose not to speak, and Moochie continued to offer more highlights from his mind. ‘ It is going to go around the town like the last time they got us evacuating for nothing and we should have stayed there if you ask me.’ The people  in  Moochie’s  truck  had  experienced  false  alarms about cyclones many times over in their lifetime, and even though this one seemed to have all the ingredients to cause havoc and the so-called Wreck  and  ruin ,  they  saw  no  point  in  hurrying,  or  being heartbroken  about  their  homes  being  destroyed.  ‘Better  to  get there  safe  than  sorry,  I  suppose,’  Moochie  drawled  on.  He  had barely taken any notice of the panic in town. ‘Whatever,’ he said, replying to the instructions from ‘stand-in’ policeman Bruiser, who told him that he could drive the truck if he went around and made sure  no  one  was  left  behind.  ‘Who’s  he  to  go  around  appointing himself policeman? Where was Truthful anyway? Isn’t it his job to organise an evacuation?’ The  old  man,  sitting  against  the  wooden  slats  on  the  side  of the truck where he was stuck with dozens of others, was the only person who looked at the land. He caught sight of Will standing in the mist. He had almost mistaken him for the trunk of a dead tree,  but  he  looked  again,  knowing  his  eyes  were  not  so  good anymore,  but  he  had  looked  at  this  country  hundreds  of  times, and  he  knows  for  darn  sure  that  there  was  no  dead  tree  of  any description  along  this  stretch  of  road .  Najba  ngambalanya  nanangkani  karrinjana  – There is a man standing there looking at us, he says, before recognising Will, but nobody takes any notice of what he has said. ‘What are  you  doing  there?’  he  asked  Will  with  a  flick  of  his hand. ‘Going home,’ Will replied with sign language. ‘ But! Big cyclone coming, boy, everybody barrba , jayi , yurrngijbangka   –  you  better  come  with  us,’  old  Joseph  again indicated with his hands. ‘Can ’t. I am going to find Bala and Hope,’ Will replied. ‘Better hurry – it won’t be long.’ ‘How long?’ Will was starting to judge the distance he still had to get to the town and find shelter. ‘ Ngamiri . Nobody told me. everyone kayi . Big fella coming this time – I heard them, barraku  talking. Cover the town. everything will go. Listen to the ocean. Soon. Warawara  yanja  ngawu  ninya  lajib .’ ‘ Alright, old malbu – until next time,’ Will replied. ‘Your damu  daddy too. Where ninji  Murriba  – who knows? until next time, baki , yarrbanji .’ Will  was  struck  by  the  humility  of  the  old  man,  and  kept looking at him as the truck yawned its way ahead, then disappeared like the end of a fairy story, into the clouds. Will followed the road into desperance. He became conscious of what the sea ahead was doing once more, and although he knew it was kilometres away, he heard  the  spirit  waves  being  rolled  in  by  the  ancestral  sea  water creatures of the currents, and conspiring with the spirits of the sky and winds to crash into the land as though it was exploding. The earth  murmured,  the  underground  serpent,  living  in  the underground  river  that  was  kilometres  wide,  responded  with hostile  growls.  This  was  the  old  war  of  the  ancestors  making cyclones grow to use against one another. So much greater had the winds increased in intensity and speed, Will  was  struggling  to  stand  upright  by  the  time  he  made  it  into desperance. He lurched from one power pole or concrete marker to  another,  flying  across  to  grab  onto  whatever  he  could,  to  hold from  being  swept  away.  The  ground  was  covered  with  moving water  picked  up  by  the  wind  and  sent  flying  along  with  the  rain against  his  legs.  Somehow,  he  avoided  the  flying  missiles  of corrugated-iron sheets peeling off the rooftops; pieces of timber, bits  large  and  small  of  blue  or  clear-coloured  plastic,  broken  tree branches,  and  everything  else  that  seemed  to  have  been  carried midair:  plastic  dolls,  children’s  toys,  boxes  and  crates  from  the Pricklebush camps, and the contents of green garbage bags straight from  the  rubbish  tip  through  the  town.  Will  passed  hundreds  of the  town’s  poultry  set  free  in  the  last  precious  moments  by  wise owners who had rushed to the chookyard and set the birds loose to fend for themselves. He dodged, weaved and ducked to avoid what had now become wet deranged bleeding balls of flesh as they were blown and bounced, nilly-pilly along the main road south and out of town. By  the  time  he  reached  the  door  of  the  pub,  the  tidal  water racing into town from the coastline was up to his knees. He held onto the verandah posts bending sideways, while the wind howled past  loaded  with  rain,  and  he  could  see  he  had  no  time  to  lose before  the  verandah  above  him  would  collapse  under  the  strain. knowing he had to get inside the closed building, he hoped as he threw  himself  towards  the  door  he  would  not  find  it  locked. Miraculously, it opened, and he could not believe his luck, that at last, something could be achieved without a great deal of effort. It was even darker inside than outside where the time of day had  become  indeterminable  from  one  hour  to  the  next.  Water floated around the darkened bar room, and when he saw the red glow of a cigarette, he was amazed to find someone else was using the pub as a refuge. ‘Lloydie Smith!’ ‘Holy smoke! You gave me a shock. A man thought you were a ghost,’ Lloydie snapped. Will collapsed in a chair and said nothing. ‘ And what the hell’s name are you doing here, anyway. There is nobody around so I don’t know what you are looking for if you are looking for anyone. If you come to rob the place – go ahead. I  won ’t  be  stopping  you.’  Lloydie  looked  at  Will  who  continued staring at him. ‘You look like you’ve been through a cyclone.’ He laughed at this irony and threw towels over to Will to dry himself and clean the blood running from his cuts, particularly on his legs. ‘ don’t you know the whole town has been evacuated?’ ‘So how come you’re still here?’ Will asked, clearly puzzled by the barman’s seemingly clear-minded decision to stay, then, seeing the ropes tied to the bar, he understood. It was actually true, Will thought,  remembering  the  women  who  told  love  stories  about Lloydie worshipping a mermaid locked in wood. They said it was true romance and he thought they were joking. of course, he was staying with his mermaid. Will looked at the wooden planks, then he  had  to  look  away.  Had  the  wind  affected  his  vision?  For  some strange  reason,  he  saw  movement  inside  the  wood.  There  was  a full-grown woman inside the wood, moving like a trapped fish, as though she were trying to swim free. He looked again to make sure, then turned away again because he could see Lloydie was watching, and could sense the man was becoming  suspicious  of  him.  Theirs  was  a  private  reunion  and besides, he could see the water level inside the building was getting higher. Will moved behind the bar, ignoring Lloydie’s silence as he sipped his glass of beer. Very quickly Will grabbed whatever food he could salvage and threw  everything  into  an  empty  green  garbage  bag  –  sandwiches wrapped in gladwrap plastic from the glass cooler, cellophaned pies from  the  heater,  drinks  from  the  fridge,  packets  of  chips  and peanuts. He saw a mailbag floating in the water which he emptied, then threw the green bag inside it and slung the lot over his back. ‘ Alright! I am going upstairs. You coming, or you going to stay here?’  Will  asked,  looking  at  Lloydie,  who  he  could  see  had  no intention of going anywhere. The water was now shooting through whatever  cracks  it  was  able  to  penetrate  to  get  inside  the  closed bar. It crossed Will’s mind just how easy it was for water to find its way inside a concrete building. He knew the glass windows would burst soon with the weight of the water but it did not seem to make a difference to Lloydie. He was set to stay. Will was on his way out of the bar when he looked back and saw that Lloydie was starting to tie the rope around himself as he lay on top of the bar. It would not take much to tighten the ropes and he would be stuck there, even if he had a change of heart about where his  mermaid  would  take  him,  it  would  take  too  long  to  untie  the ropes again. Will tried to open the back door but it refused to open with the weight  of  the  water  banked  up  against  the  walls  and  shooting through the cracks. Will felt a cold flush of perspiration run down his body. For a moment, he thought of the door bursting open with the  strain  and  the  water  pouring  into  the  bar.  He  had  to  get  out quickly and he shouted back to Lloydie, if there was another way to get upstairs. ‘Get the ladder in the store room.’ ‘Where’s that?’ ‘ over at the back of the bar, there is a little folding ladder, get it,  and  look  up  to  the  ceiling  in  the  corridor  just  near  the  door here. There is a trapdoor. Force it open.’ In no  time  Will  had  the  trapdoor  unbolted  and  the  food  bag upstairs. ‘You coming?’ he hollered through the noise back down to Lloydie. When he got no response, he shouted, ‘The whole place will be flooded once the water breaks through.’ When Lloydie did not respond, Will had to decide whether he should go straight back down and free Lloydie of his ropes, or let the man be. He realised that even if he could get the ropes off him, he was unlikely to leave. So he brought up the ladder. The  top floor of the building had been constructed of timber decades before Will had seen the light of day. The ageing wood that creaked with the sound of dryness as the temperature rose in the summertime, now groaned with the 180-kilometre winds and rain lashing the building. The galvanised roof whined, and wind roared across the north-facing verandah, and through the north door to the coast. Like an open-mouthed animal in pain, the wind roared through, and the noise shot down the corridor to the door it had forced open on the south-facing verandah. Will slipped over the wet linoleum, holding on to the door of each  bedroom,  until  he  reached  the  north  door  and  forced  it closed. He went about closing windows left open, or closing the doors  to  rooms  where  the  windows  had  been  broken.  He  went back  to  the  trapdoor  once  he  felt  he  had  secured  the  building sufficiently and called down to Lloydie. repeatedly, he shouted down to the ground floor until his echo jumped back at him. He could  see  little  into  the  darkness  but  he  heard  the  water  and realised that it had broken into the building and the whole of the bottom  floor  would  now  be  under  water.  The  water  would  be covering the bar. Lloydie had stayed until the end. He listened and heard nothing, so he closed the hatch. The signs of darkness were increasing in the building, and he waited, chewing quietly on whatever he pulled out of the bag. He knew he had to eat, although he never felt hunger, and he tried  not  to  notice  that  he  was  not  alone  on  the  top  floor  of  the building.  He  remembered  the  strange  sounds  of  his  childhood, when  his  family  had  joined  the  rest  of  the  town  inside  the  hotel while  a  cyclone  passed  over  the  coastline  in  the  vicinity  of desperance. everyone had waited out the storm crowded together in  the  humidity  of  the  closed  building,  and  he  shuffled  around uncomfortably,  looking  for  the  place  where  the  ghosts  came  in, until he found a pocket of fresh air jetting its way through a crack. Sitting at the end of the hallway, he listened to the roar of the water rushing by outside. He heard it lapping the floorboards. He waited. It was still high when the wind dropped. He did not move. It was pitch-black and he could not see a thing, but he felt other presences in every creak and slamming of objects in the building. He was certain there were others nearby. In his mind, he saw the drowned seafarers of the town coming down to the pub, walking around  the  building,  visiting.  He  felt  the  fear  of  being  a  child again,  hiding  behind  the  wall  of  the  fishroom,  listening  to  his father talking to other men about what happened to all those dead fishermen lost in the sea when a cyclone came. The coolness of the wall touched his ear as he pressed against it, anxious to know what had happened to the dead men. People say when a humble man really listened and looked past the  obvious,  then  he  might  fly  with  music  into  the  unknown. Norm’s voice rolled on like waves themselves pouring out the tales of what he had seen at sea and his fathers before him. So, Will’s ear by the wall heard it was alright to die a lonely death at sea because a cyclone will always show you the way home. Those lost souls lying down there in their lonely watery grave, many fathoms deep, were thrown  up  from  under  the  sand,  like  seaweed  plucked  from  the floor  of  the  sea  in  a  giant  waterspout  of  the  ancestral  serpent. Nowadays, even drowned sailors were sucked out of barges down in the cargo holds in the dead grey waters of poisonous mine ore. Lord  only  knows  he  always  kept  watch,  Norm  said,  when  he saw the waterspout coming before the rain. For his life he headed in  from  the  sea,  and  sometimes,  just  managed  to  come  into  the river  mouth  in  the  nick  of  time.  Tied  up  in  the  mangroves,  he saved himself many, many times from going up in the waterspout heading up the river. This was no mumbo jumbo either because other fishing men caught in the rain, never saw it coming to save their  souls.  Their  boats  were  picked  up  and  thrown  kilometres away, and those who survived, who landed back in the exact spot – boat intact – said they were lucky to be alive. So, Norm warned, he  stayed  where  the  mangrove  fish  hid,  watching  those  dead fishing men being spun up into the clouds themselves, and Will imagined his father watching them spin around up there, making pacts with the ancestral being over the sea, until the giant vortex of thundering  water  travelled  over  towards  the  shoreline  of  the beach,  and  threw  them  into  the  walls  of  water,  perhaps  twenty metres high, heading like hellfire into desperance. Far into the night, Will sat against the wall, waiting, listening to the deafening winds, rain and flooding waters converge, like sheets of powerful energy attacking the building. But he was never alone. The  lost  seafarers  continued  tramping  about  the  building throughout  the  night.  Will  heard  them  moving  around  through the  bar  below,  laughing  at  their  fate,  falling  over  furniture  and picking  it  up  and  throwing  it  against  the  walls  and  tramping back into the rooms where they used to sleep. He knew when the waters receded, the sea would reclaim its dead folk and they would be gone before daybreak. When the big God almighty spirit… In that wild night of deafening madness, where a moment of sleep  was  exchanged  for  another  moment  of  wakefulness,  Will Phantom thought a devil had made its haven in his mind where it rolled around, like a dog in dirt. He craved to walk outside into the deluge to escape a world that seemed to be falling in on him; he  was  overcome  with  a  desire  to  rip  off  the  bare  shell  of  his being so that he could walk away free from thoughts that were so oppressive, he felt like he was going mad. But somehow, in this madness,  a  plan  was  hatching. other  ideas  emerged  from  the twisted  wreckage  of  his  brain.  Something  that  resembled  an escape plan was fighting its way through the catastrophic imagery like a flea. The plan seemed easy, but it too was slippery to hold, for it resembled something of a truth. So, he lingered. He sought justification.  Surely,  he  questioned,  there  had  to  be  something wrong with somebody searching for a wife and child he practically could not even remember? This was the problem of being a man of constant vigil. They were people he barely even knew. No  answer  could  be  found  to  the  potent  question  he  had posed for himself, but he searched his soul for it and in doing so, a quietness finally came to him. Will Phantom may have had the skills of a wizard from all his thinking, which went inside the land itself,  for  all  of  the  old  passed-away  people  he  had  ever remembered  had  journeyed  back  to  town,  and  he  saw  them assembled  in  the  rain  outside  on  the  verandah.  He  saw  them through glass louvres – you have news Will Phantom . He could hear them talking among themselves while the rain swept  through  their  image,  then  once  again,  startled,  awake,  he told himself it was only the timber verandah moaning in the wind. even if drenched to the bone, old people, he knew were too afraid to come into the white man’s building. So, still, their voices:  Oh! My boy! really sacred one. Scared of that one.  The wind blew the rain with such a force it blew in all the cracks: it blew under each pane of glass in the rows of louvres, until finally, the glass exploded. Then in  came  an  old,  skinny,  mission-educated  woman  dressed  in  a floral  dress  dirtied  by  her  own  country  anyhow,  and  plonked upon her head one of those knitted beanie caps. Well! Why not? So, this woman would come skimming along in Will’s dreams too, because  she  had  every  right  to  grab  her  turn  in  a  countryman’s dreams. From  faraway  places,  far  off  in  realm  of  the dreamtime,  Will had  seen  her  before,  cascading  along  the  floods,  singing  arias  in her  pluming  voice  for  the  nightmare  cyclone,  snapping  fingers, recording the death toll of all living creatures in a ledger book. She cast a spell on his mind, spinning it like a ferris wheel until times and places became one. When he saw her coming he might have offended  the  old  woman  because  he  never  called  out,  ‘Hey! old woman it’s good to see you,’ or anything like that. He did not want to offend her now, and in a clipping voice, whether she heard or not, he demanded: ‘ don’t you notice me here old woman because I  feel  too  sick  and  tired  to  talk  to  anyone  right  at  the  moment.’ old woman could cast any kind of spell she wanted to, and it was best  to  have  said  nothing  he  realised,  when  she  made  a  beeline straight  for  him.  Say  nothing.  So,  the  baggitty  old  Queen  of  the Pricklebush world stood up there in front of him, and she stared down at him for some moments with her black rings around her eyes like weeping mascara. Then she tapped him on his foot with her hunting stick, and announced in a voice that plumbed his guts, ‘Countryman, hello.’ She reeked of turtle fat oil, and she said she had just returned from the sea, and it was good. She said her sons were proper, good hunters, unlike some other people because they had caught plenty of turtle to eat. Will knew this was true, listening to her speak the hoitie-toitie  Queen’s  diction  better  than  the  Queen  herself. Listening to her, you would swear you were listening to the Queen’s Christmas message being broadcast from Buckingham Palace. The only difference was that she never looked like a real Queen dressed in pale lime paisley, like the Queen, but it did not matter; she was a queen anyway, and she said this to Will: ‘ remember the real people of the Gulf, those poor black souls living  on  heartbreak  and  worries  in  the  Pricklebush  because  they know all about cyclones, unlike those copycat up town  dolce  vita  type of  people  sitting  in  comfortable  armchairs  expecting  to  acquire their  ancestral  ties  with  the  sea  by  sitting  on  their  posteriors watching  television  programs,  and  never  going  out  to  sea  on  any occasion  to  pay  their  respects,  like  the  old  people  who  were  the backbone of the Pricklebush who did not mind paying their dues, and  will  tell  you  cyclones  don’t  come  from  nowhere,  because there is plenty of business going on when cyclones come onto the country  out  of  the  rooftop  of  the  world,  like  what  is  going  on outside  now  from  the  most  powerful  creation  spirits,  who  come down out of the skies like a tempest when they start looking for Law breakers.’ ‘ Jesus Christ,’ Will wished her to be gone. He tried  not  to  sleep,  but  his  mind  kept  travelling  back  into memories of the old people like the turtle woman of his childhood. old wizards with wrinkled faces and kind expressions for children came by to look at Will. Their faces poking out of brightly coloured beanie caps tugged down on their head, with a pompom perched on top which bobbed whenever they talked, which delighted and fascinated all of the running and screaming Pricklebush kids, who got whacked with a stick, proper hard, for not listening. And if you sat long enough, looking closely into their eyes, you saw aglow the amazing  world  full  of  stories  they  told  in  competition  with  each other. No, my boy, listen to me first. it wasn’t like that old fool told you. Never listen to him. he is only number one for a pack of lies. it was like what i  am telling you because i  saw it from the start to finish and he only know  what i   copied  for  him.  old  stories  circulating  around  the Pricklebush were full of the utmost intrigues concerning the world. Legends of the sea were told in instalments every time you walked in the door of some old person’s house. Stories lasted months on end, and if you did not visit often, you would never know how the story ended. Will knew a lot of half-told stories and the old people looked desperate outside the louvres, competing over each other’s voices to end their story to him. ‘Hey! Tap!  Tap!  You  inside  there?  You  heard  about  my  story sonny?’ ‘ Call out and say if you know what is good for you from my little story I tried to tell you one time but you never come back to see me.’ This  was  one  old  woman  in  her  multi-coloured  beanie  cap retelling  her  story.  Will  recalled  seeing  her  again,  clear  as  day, dragging a Sunshine milk tin across the dirt in the exact map of the river. He remembered how the line in the ground went about its intention, moving slowly, right up the winding river. Her voice snapped:  ‘ remember  that  time?’  Nobody  had  seen  a  cyclone acting  like  that  before. even  Will  was  old  enough,  that  time,  to witness  the  storm  mass  moving  away  down  around  the  bends  of the river, searching for a Law breaker she said, that had caused the creation spirit to come after him. As the cyclone moved on it gathered  more  and  more  strength  from  following  along  the  flat surface of the river so it never died out like it should have, once it hit the high country. This particular cyclone, winding through the  hills,  caused  widespread  floods  and  ripped  out  ancient rivergum  trees,  and  thousand-year-old  fig  trees  from  the riverbank, and what was left of those trees was thrown away like bits  of  grass  that  landed  flat  as  a  tack  kilometres  away  in  the spinifex. The poor river looked like it had been bombed. Then, the cyclone found the man it was looking for. He was hiding in a town which had never been hit by a cyclone before because of its being  too  far  inland.  He  thought  he  was  safe  there,  but  the cyclone  went  ahead  and  wrecked  that  town  to  smithereens  and worse, and in all of the wreckage it left behind, only one person died. It was the Law breaker. Will felt the cyclone was attacking the building, ramming into it like sledgehammers, trying to tear it apart, as if it was looking for him, or someone else. He was convinced that there was someone else in one of the rooms at the end of the building driving the wind to them. A magic man or cats. He envisaged the back of a man who was bending over, performing a ritual with wreaths of rain grass to bring  the  storm  to  them,  who  in  his  heart  of  hearts  Will  guessed was old Joseph. He kept reminding himself it could not have been old Joseph, because he was in the truck being driven to the hills. Nobody  like  old  Joseph  would  have  made  it  back  through  the storm. A tap on the louvres and Will spun around, ‘You know they say he is a witchdoctor.’ ‘Who?’ asked Will. ‘ old Joseph. Who do you think I was talking about?’ some old person with a beanie shouts his Pricklebush truths. At this point, believing the building was doomed, that the walls were about to fall apart, Will could actually hear a man chanting the storm-making ceremony, and besides, he heard Norm’s voice roll through the ceiling, telling his night-time stories to children in his straight forward voice that told no lie. Low and humble. ‘Tell it  low  and  humble.’  A  voice  capable  of  drowning  out  the  storm racket with incantations inciting Will not to fly to where the white lilies  bloomed  in  the  swamp,  no  matter  what  the  orchestra  was playing. Continuously, thinking of his father, remembering him, Will found he was now imitating someone who had condemned all else he  had  made  of  his  life  outside  the  Phantom  household  to irrelevancy.  He  kept  remembering  a  time  when  he  listened  and tried to memorise every word Norm had said to him as a child, and  wondering  why.  Was  his  life  irrelevant  if  he  could  barely remember  it?  Will  considered  the  old  people’s  prophecy.  What goes around, comes around, the old people always said: The father calls  the  son  home.  Sons  sail  home  in  ships  of  nostalgia.   It  made  him think  of  the  Fishman,  the  man  he  had  come  to  consider  as  his father, now a fading memory of a handshake. Time and the huge distance of country each had travelled had created its own sense of forgetting. It was as though the older man had released some magic  hold  he  had  held  over  Will  and  returned  him  to  Norm, whom Will watched while standing on the shore of some unknown beach. Norm was busy working and Will watched from the distance, too far away, but looking through rows of silver fish hanging from lines erected on poles across the beach with smoke rising through them. reminded  of  a  scene  from  his  past  life,  Will  thought  of himself  watching  his  father  from  a  distance  in  the  dimly  lit workshop  under  rows  of  silver  fish  dangling  from  the  ceiling  as though  they  were  swimming  in  air.  He  called  out  to  Norm  as though  he  had  just  returned  home  after  a  short  absence  away. ‘Hey! dad it’s me Will. What are you doing?’ The big man in black singlet and shorts did not look up, but continued working. Will heard his voice resounding back to him like a slap in the face, which he instantly put down to the fact that his father was still not talking to him. No communication. Will repeated these words  to  himself  as  he  tried  to  decide  what  to  do  next  to  catch his father’s attention. But as he stood on this foreign beach, his hurting ears listened only to the deafening roar of the cyclone. It was  impossible  to  be  heard  in  the  disorientation  of  eardrums bursting  under  pressure;  where  his  vocal  cords  could  not  form words  loud  enough  to  be  heard.  Nobody  would  hear  him.  He could  not  even  hear  himself.  Norm  continued  his  work,  gazing down  into  a  forty-four-gallon  drum,  stirring  it  with  a  big  stick. Will assumed he was making his fish tanning potions again. Waves crushed onto the deserted beach, and eventually, after several minutes had passed, Will saw Norm take his stick from the drum  and  head  towards  the  surf.  As  he  scanned  around  he noticed there was other movement on the beach, and turning to get a better view of what was submerged beneath the clouds, he saw Hope. She was alive and dressed in the same black singlet and shorts as Norm, only these were several sizes too large for her thin body. Not believing what he was seeing, he blinked. Could clouds play  tricks  with  his  eyes?  When  he  looked  again  and  saw  it  was her, he called. But it was just as with Norm, she could not hear him, and she continued on her way. She dissolved in the clouds that  covered  the  water  where  the  waves  hit  the  beach.  Then, when  he  saw  her  again,  she  was  walking  carefully  through  the clouds, placing one foot in front of the other. He moved through the fish rows to get closer, he did not want to disturb her, in case she slipped, and fell into the water beneath the mist. He watched  her  walk  out  towards  the  sea,  above  the  water, moving very carefully, and when the cloud cover shifted slightly, he saw  the  grey  sea  water.  She  walked  on  top  of  the  boiling  water through the roll of the incoming waves. He was surprised that he was  not  shocked,  but  he  was  adamant  in  his  resolve  which  only made  him  his  father’s  man.  He  would  stay  unbelieving  of  any passing images and realities except his own, sitting against a wall ready  to  collapse  under  the  tidal  surge  of  the  cyclone.  With  an increasingly heavy heart, he watched her spirit going back into the sea. It was like another nightmare, trying to keep her in his sights, yet  the  more  he  tried  to  get  to  her,  he  was  unable  to  find  a  way through the never-ending rows of fish. ‘Hope, wait up,’ he yelled, but it was hopeless. She never heard his voice. However gusty the wind,  he  saw  she  kept  her  hands  held  out  from  her  side,  and  in each palm she balanced a red glowing ball. Flares. Flares, she had flares, he thought, thinking they were all alive. It was a sign. She. Norm. Bala? Where was Bala? He had to be somewhere and Will looked again, saw clouds surrounding the beach, then he saw her again. This  time,  she  was  moving  out  into  deeper  water,  yet  still walking  on  top  of  it,  very  carefully,  she  had  to  be  balancing  on something like a thick sea rope, used for big boats, held taut, just below the surface. He never saw it at first, but there it was, barely under  water,  and  Hope  walking  on  top  of  the  water  splashing against the rope. She was heading towards a boat painted green, and using the big rope securing it to land. This was the safe boat of  his  childhood  rocking  in  the  surf  just  as  it  had  done  before: Norm’s boat. Anchor down, staring at it slipping along the sand, through the green seagrass, where a thousand bubbles caught his eye. under the sea a strange phenomenon heralded Bala’s face of all things looking up towards the light from below the surface of the water, where bubbles followed in a procession from his closed lips. His brave little boy’s small hands seemed terrifying, drenched of colour, clasping a moving rock covered in slime. ‘Hey! dad. over there. Look!’ Will waved his arms frantically and Norm continued his work. ‘God! He’s drowning,’ Will tried to yell into the silent wall of this world, when suddenly, the surface of the waves broke through with Bala on the back of a grey sea fish. The boy swung himself from the back of a huge groper onto the ship’s rope and ran along it after his mother, and Will watched them, she first, fading from view into the  clouds.  It  was  all  over  in  seconds,  but  Will  was  still  running through rows of fish, and realising, he could run forever and more rows would take the place of the ones he had passed. With  his  lungs  bursting,  he  stopped,  and  returned  to  the darkness from his dream. He knew he would run through all of the fish nets in the world and never find what he was looking for, as he would always run, but never fast enough, to catch up to his past. He relived the vision and made a pact. He would find them out in the sea somewhere. But doubt still raised its ugly head and compelled  him  to  check  the  boat.  Hunched  into  the  wall  he  sat studying  the  vision.  He  looked  underside,  side  on,  from  under the  water  with  a  stingray’s  eye,  while  gliding  across  the  sand. doubt saw algae in the place of green paint. Algae flowed in long green hair underneath the hull and along the rope, it hung limp to the boat’s side, and inside, a garden of green flourished. Norm had waded out to the waist-deep, grey water. Will  waited for the moment and when the clouds parted with the  next  gust  of  wind,  his  eyes  surveyed  the  beach. out  in  the water, he saw his father stirring up the mud with his long stick. Very quickly, he realised what Norm was doing. He had been there before and watched his father in exactly the same way. In the same place. Norm and elias had taken him there fishing. The three of them had spent days fishing on the open sea. Will was told he was going  nowhere  when  he  asked  repeatedly  where  they  would  end up. Normally he would be told what fishing reef or hole to look out for. Norm had sat on the beach doing nothing after they had come into  land.  He  watched  the  waters. elias  did  everything  with  Will tagging along. elias hunted, fished, fetched water, cooked so that they  could  eat.  Norm  sat  on  the  beach.  Will  watched  his  father’s bare back, sitting still in the same spot in the morning after he had woken  up  next  to elias,  who  slept  with  his  back  to  the  beach, protecting them both from the blowing sand. Will saw that Norm was watching majinmaja , the fish hawk, hover, dive and fly off to its nest. Waiting he said, ‘See what majinmaja ’s doing?’ Yeah, Will said he  would  stay  and  watch  too.  ‘No  you  go  with elias.’  Why?  He always watched majinmaja  at sea. ‘Help elias.’ The fish  hawk  came  back  and  caught  another  fish  and  went away.  All  day  it  was  the  same.  Then  Norm  suddenly  got  up  and went into the waters. He remembered Norm stirring up the water in  a  corner  of  the  headland.  He  had  waded  out  in  the  same  way and spent most of the day, and the night, stirring up the clay mud and sand. elias said nothing when Will asked him what his father was  doing.  ‘None  of  my  business,  yours  neither.  You  and  me  are here for one thing, to fish for fish.’ In  the  morning,  the  three  of  them  had  watched  the  trail  of discoloured  water  drifting  away.  Years  later,  Fishman  had  told him  in  his  raspy  voice,  which  he  claimed  was  from  singing  too much  country  and  western,  that  Norm  was  in  a  storm-making place.  ‘He  was  singing  up  the  spirits  in  the  water,  boy,  to  make storms  for  his  enemy.’ even  though  the  Fishman  never  went  to sea,  he  mentioned  an  itinerary  of  site  places  along  the  coast  for making storms and counter storms powerful enough to wipe out the  entire  enemy.  ‘However,’  Fishman  explained  after  naming several  hundred  sites  in  a  geography  he  had  never  travelled,  ‘I don’t know all of these places. But some do. Your father knows, because he can fly through storms like an angel.’ Fishman sighed. reluctantly, he had admitted more than he normally would about other people being more powerful than himself. ‘Just one or two, you know. You are always going to have some fellas and women who  must  have  swapped  their  blood  for  magic.  No,  it  is  right. They only got magic running through their veins. Me! I only got a little bit of both. But they can be wherever they choose.’ Will knew how impossible it would be, trying to find any of the locations he had memorised from Mozzie’s long list of names. He already knew some of those places were many kilometres inland in the dry season, but became the beach, when this land joined the sea in the Wet. other special sites formed part of a sandbank out in the sea. A place only visible certain times in the right season, and if you knew the right tide to choose from at least a half-a-dozen tides and currents all circulating about in the bay of the Gulf. or, maybe, you  would  only  reach  this  place  at  night,  if  you  knew  how  to navigate  by  stars.  Mozzie  said  all  this  travelling  at  sea  was  very dangerous  activity  and  this  was  the  reason  why  he  stayed  away from salt water. ‘You got to be more than traditional. You got to be mad as…a magician. You got to be a fish…a wizard to find any of those places. Me! I am ordinary for dry dirt.’ The discoloured water was drifting, and just briefly, Will saw it clearly  enough  to  distinguish  it  was  heading  east  –  towards desperance. on seeing the tongue of water, Will knew he had to remember where the place was, he had to see the beach, to become patient, in the hope he would see it again. Yet his attempt to remain calm disappointed him. He felt he was drifting out of the dream, because once again, he heard the chanting in the room at the end of the corridor, and the sound of water running through the bar below  was  even  greater  than  the  winds  and  flooding  outside.  He forced the fish hawk to come back to that day, and watched it hover and dive for fish, pushing through take after take, until finally, he could  see  the  bird  working  along  the  movement  of  the  current. This time, he remembered something different about the beach he had glimpsed between the clouds while looking for Norm. In that instant  he  had  been  surprised  to  see  Norm  standing  out  in  the water. Something had been different about the beach. Now it was too difficult to recall what it was. His memory  grew  fainter  the  harder  he  tried  to  remember, while the noises of the building seemed to penetrate not only his mind,  but  to  grow  toxic  inside  his  body. downstairs,  bar  stools, chairs  and  tables  rattled  against  each  other  in  the  flooded  hotel. Bottles smashed against the walls. The noise made him think about Lloydie’s  fate;  was  he  still  roped  to  the  bar,  or  had  his  dream  of being taken away to sea with his mermaid been fulfilled? He knew he would have to go downstairs and check. The roof continued its non-stop rustling. rain pelted it. The floorboards creaked in every closed  bedroom.  The  roar  of  the  sea  showed  no  mercy.  There would be no letting up. No respite for quietness. There was noise in  the  movement  of  water  flooding  back  to  the  sea  carting  the wreckage  with  it.  All  passed  over  the  flooded  land  groaning  with the remains of buildings, boats, cars, trees, rocks, electricity poles, fences, cargo from fallen ships, plastic consignments scrambled like licorice allsorts and dead animals. All this rolled along, slamming together in the water, just like it had on the beach in his dream. A  beach  plastered  with  waste,  brown  stinking  froth  and  foam where a cyclone had struck. Will was too shocked to move from the realisation of his father’s payback to the town. of course they had survived, Will agreed with himself, yet argued the  toss.  It  seemed  unimaginable  that  all  three  of  them  –  Hope, Bala  and  Norm  –  were  together,  and  having  survived  the catastrophic  cyclone,  were  preparing  to  leave.  He  jumped  to  his feet, speaking out loudly in his excitement – ‘It was time to leave.’ He ran to open the doors of the bedrooms he had closed the night before,  to  let  out  the  noise,  not  stopping  to  see  what  happened behind  him,  the  escaping  pussycats  scrambling  over  the  slippery corridor, a flock of swallows flying frantically up and down in the hallway in a futile attempt to exit the building. It was only much later he would realise he had seen the skin and bone person. A real nomad  countryman,  living  like  a  gipsy.  The  sort  of  person  who could avoid being seen by dissolving himself into a wall if he had to.  They  were  the  people  who  drifted  silently  in  and  out  of  the bush, never speaking to anyone outside of their group. Somehow, just as silently, this group had drifted for cover to the hotel, climbed upstairs,  and  each  had  sequenced  their  being  into  rumples  of clothing, bundles of nothingness, in a room of its own. He stalled at the end room, where he imagined he heard the chanting of Midnight. Although the room was now silent he sensed the  macabre  power  of  the  old  man  lingering  behind  the  closed door, and a chill ran through him. At first, he did not want to open the door because he thought he might see a ghost masquerading as old Joseph sitting there. Yet, he had to know, so very carefully he turned the handle, and was just about to say, ‘Good morning old man,’  so  sure  he  had  been  that  he  would  see  old  Joseph  sitting there frightening the Jesus out of him as he eased the door open. The room was empty. Yet whoever had been in that room, Will felt the malediction of his presence, and knew he was about to faint as the  sweet  smell  of  trampled,  wet  fresh  grass  overcame  him.  He slammed  the  door  shut.  He  ran  up  the  other  side  of  the  row  of bedrooms, opening doors, without taking a breath until he reached the door to the verandah to the north, and opened it. The grey cloud of swallows, a thousand pairs, in an instant of surreal flight flew through, and before he realised what had happened,  they  had  disappeared  into  the  clouds.  Will  sighed loudly in the space of the damp, feathered air left by the birds. He inhaled the fresh sea wind speeding inland with the clouds, while  thousands  of  sea  birds  headed  out  to  sea.  He  watched them while he thought about his dreams until, moments later, he believed he had struck gold. of  course, he had it at last. out of  nothing,  he  was  grasping  the  eluding  pieces  of  the  escaping dream.  Now,  cried  out  to  the  drowning  north  lands. over  and over  his  voice  spread,  sending  a  shiver  down  the  columns  of birds heading overhead. His eyes recaptured the direction of the beach with the swaying fish left out to dry. He knew Norm was preparing to leave. Hope and  Bala  were  going  on  board.  She  carried  blue-rimmed  fire  to show the way for Bala to follow her out into the fog where the boat was moored in the deeper waters at the end of the rope. everything was fine because they were with Norm, and he would bring them home through the storm. And all he had to do? All Will believed he had to do was to ride the outgoing tide and find them. Yes! Yes! Yes! Meet them halfway. He would go. ‘I am leaving now – I swear I have already left.’ First though, he would go down and tell Lloydie what had happened to him. He felt good. He could not remember feeling so good. It was good to be alive and he would go right down and find Lloydie and tell him that. Mermaids do not live in wood he would tell Lloydie. He would say it nearly cost him his life. ‘ knock on wood, Lloydie. Get  a  life,’  he  yelled  down  through  the  open  trapdoor.  Water answered instead, as it crashed against the walls and sent the spray up into his face. Will scrambled down into the darkness, lowering himself down, and the waters responded. He became caught in the whirlpool of muddy  waters,  and  to  save  himself  from  being  swept  away,  he grabbed  around  for  a  grip,  holding  on  to  the  solid  structures  of doorways and corners, as he was propelled through the building. He clawed his way to where he assumed the bar once stood, and realised  he  was  looking  everywhere  for  Lloydie’s  body,  and searching for nothing, when he discovered the wooden masthead was  gone.  She  had  taken  Lloydie  away.  They  had  gone  in  the outgoing tide. She had knocked against the door long enough to dislodge it from its hinges, and they had floated through, to join the wide wall of water heading back to the sea. Navigating underwater, Will steered himself back towards the trapdoor. He surfaced for air, swallowed it, and forced his way back down to avoid being thrown into a wall, or knocked unconscious by the objects passing through the building. Swiftly he moved through the chaos of yellow waters. It seemed like an eternity had passed before he reached the doorway between the bar and the corridor, the door now missing, at the back of the hotel, where he surfaced. He pulled himself out of the water. Luckily the level of the water was  high  enough  for  him  to  reach  the  trapdoor  opening,  and luckily he was long-limbed and skinny enough, to be able to pull himself  back  onto  the  top  floor.  As  he  sat  up  there  catching  his breath,  he  wondered  what  Lloydie’s  mermaid  looked  like.  She would  look  like  a  ghost  swimming  through  plains  of  mustard yellow waters with a dead man roped to her back. From the verandah doorway he saw the roaring water towering towards the horizon of the open sea.  only the hotel rose out of the flood  as  a  bizarre,  twisted,  island  abode  of  the  Gods. on  the rooftop, sea birds were packed so tightly under the heavy canopy of dark clouds, it gave the appearance of a giant white flower full of  red  beaked  seeds.  The  old  wooden  verandah  had  collapsed  in the  winds  and  now  hung  like  a  shirt  collar  around  the  building. Listening to it moan and creak, he thought it was a wonder it had not collapsed altogether. The longer he looked down in the waters the more he felt like letting go; to fall into its universe. He was sure that at any moment he  would  see  the  movement  in  the  racing  waters  of  some  living creature, someone alive, and he almost allowed himself to fall. So convinced he would find his destiny in the floodwaters, as though the  waters  were  beckoning  him,  urging  him  to  believe  he  could simply  drift  along  in  the  direction  of  where  the  waters  were moving, until he saw Norm’s green boat. And Will Phantom was right to think he was lucky, leaning his skinny body out of the building, barely holding on to the doorway, and  not  caring  if  he  fell,  because  any  second  he  knew  he  could simply let go, with full certainty of falling straight into the destiny he had prescribed for himself. He had not figured fate, when the top  floor  under  his  feet  suddenly  moved.  The  floorboards  had been  shaken  so  violently,  he  was  sent  flying  into  the  floodwaters. He hit the water hard, went under into the billowing yellow waters, where he rolled blindly in  vacuo  with the dead of the deep, before being  returned  in  a  frenzy  of  breathlessness  to  the  surface. Somewhere, in all of that water sweeping him towards the sea, he was able to turn to see what had happened to his little oasis. He saw  not  a  hotel  left  far  behind  but  a  small  castle  for  the recreation  of  spirits.  This  new  reality  had  nothing  to  do  with  the order  of  man.  There  was  no  town  of desperance.  It  was  gone.  A monster  followed  him  instead.  The  houses,  the  loading  port,  the boats and cars, every bit of every so-and-so’s this or that, along with the remains of the pipeline for the ore from the mine, and even the barges and cargo snatched up by the cyclone had travelled inland, and  were  coming  back. every  bit  of  it  had  been  crushed  into  a rolling mountainous wall that now included the hotel where only moments ago, Will Phantom had been standing. It was at this point he realised how history could be obliterated when the Gods move the country. He saw history rolled, reshaped, undone  and  mauled  as  the  great  creators  of  the  natural  world engineered  the  bounty  of  everything  man  had  ever  done  in  this part of the world into something more of their own making. Was he shocked? Bugger the hotel, he thought, it could go with the rest. The  bulwark  of  the  spirits  rose  from  the  waters,  and  he  saw nothing monstrous or hideous in this new creation taking shape, moving,  rolling,  changing  appearance,  and  beauty  in  its  strident crashing back into the water. The sight of the devastation was nothing short of salubrious as far  as  he  was  concerned.  The  macabre  construction  resembled  a long-held dream of the water world below the ground where the ancient spirits of the creation period rested, while Aboriginal man was supposed to care for the land. He wrestled with thoughts of the future. When the waters receded what man would walk to the salt marsh to scratch the surface? What man digging under the surface, under  layers  of  silt,  would  announce  the  discovery  of  the  devil’s polluted palace? Then his view was gone. He went  swirling  back  into  the  flow  of  the  water  and  all  he could  think  to  save  himself,  was  what  would  happen  if  he  got caught  in  a  snag.  What  if  he  became  entangled  in  the  lines  of barbed  wire  fence  strung  across  some  boundary?  When  the monstrous  palace  following  him  would  catch  up,  and  drag  him under, what then? It seemed like ages before he had a chance to look back at the colossal architecture of the storm. But it was gone. Again  and  again,  repeatedly,  his  eyes  searched  for  the  castle  but only waters followed in his wake. Wish whatever… What  a catastrophic requiem took place in those floodwaters racing out to sea. Listening up high, he swore there were hundreds of God’s angels singing:  Gloria in excelsis Deo. Et in terra pax hominibus bonae  voluntatis .  The  waters  poured  dead  fish.  Sodden  spinifex grasses.  Sticks.  Green  wood.  Branches.  Plastic.  Plastic  Malanda bottles. Green bags tied up with rubbish. He drank the stinking air manufactured  by  the  porridge  of  decaying  fish  and  gladly,  the nauseating stench touched him. Blue and orange plastic sheeting formed  a  never-ending  maze  through  which  he  was  effortlessly poured.  In  the  mayhem  of  buoyant  bodies,  bloated  animals floating by touched him ever so lightly. Green frogs resting on the dead hailed him: Vale! The herds. Poor nanny-goats from the goat farm.  Farewell!  Bruiser’s  cattle  and  horses.  Say  goodbye  pack  of dogs. Pussycats. Chookie fowl. Sad day for the animals of the bush. kangaroo, wallaby, wild boars. Feral cats. Marsupial mice. Pelicans. He eyed every bit of the ghostly brown froth and bother heading towards  him  with  outstretched  arms,  purposely  wanting  to  draw him to its huge, smothering body. other  things  touched  him  too,  and  the  madness  went  on and on… on and on the floodwaters raced until receding far out in the ocean waters. It was there, during the night, that Will was washed onto a wet, slippery object. He did not know what he held on to in the darkness but it kept him afloat. Then he flinched. Something alive  touched  him  and  the  sensation  of  fear  he  had  felt  in  the floodwaters, again overcame him. He struggled out of the water, by clawing into the slipperiness, and climbing, not knowing if he was crawling  onto  the  body  of  a  sea  serpent.  He  clawed  higher  and higher, slithering over the oily surface of whatever lay below him, unable to stop, while wave after wave lashed him, trying to pull him back.  The  clouds  broke,  the  new  moon  shone  its  halo  of  peace. relieved for such an absolution of light, he looked down to find he had been dumped onto an extraordinary floating island of rubbish. While the  serpentine  flotation  rocked  in  the  waves,  the  sum total of its parts rubbed, grated and clanked together, as it became more tightly enmeshed into a solid mass that squashed every inch of oil and stench out of the dead marine life it had trapped in its guts.  Will  listened  to  the  embryonic  structure’s  strange  whines echoing  off  into  the  darkness,  then,  he  realised  the  enormity  of those  sounds  was  familiar  to  him.  He  was  astonished  and  then weakened by the feeling of helplessness, that a man feels, hearing the sounds of labour. He felt like he was an intruder to be clinging to  a  foetus  inside  the  birth  canal,  listening  to  it,  witnessing  the journey of creation in the throes of a watery birth. Whenever moonlight struck again through the clouds, he saw the  moonbeams  reflected  off  a  multitude  of  hovering  seagulls. Their bodies shone far away like glints of silver glitter. He imagined the  new  island  stretching  for  many  kilometres.  He  was  full  of wonder at its destiny, intertwined now with his own. He pondered how he might live indefinitely on the wreckage beneath which he imagined was a tightly jammed composition of barges, ship’s hulls, fishing boats, prawners, plastic containers, timber and whatnot. Perhaps,  he  thought,  if  he  became  practical,  since  he  was  not wise,  he  could  survive  if  he  conserved  rainwater  in  tanks  and whatever cavities he might find on the surface. He knew he would have to work hard to find where the waterholes were and secure them from the birds and from contaminating sea water. Next day! In  the  morning!  He  decided  to  build  himself  shelter  from  the elements. of course! Naturally! The cloud cover would eventually lift, and if he did nothing, he would be exposed to the sun. When the  ‘low’  had  blown  away,  he  would  salvage  material  to  build  his own boat to find Hope and the boy. one day? Soon! Soon! Come hither fish, come sea spirits, demons, marine monsters. He would have to learn about all of them if he were to survive. He would have to chart nautical routes in his mind. He would have to start  remembering  the  journey  of  the  heavens,  all  of  the  stars, breezes,  just  like  his  father,  Norm  Phantom.  He  would  have  to comprehend the feeling of water beneath the weight of his island and make its currents his map. In order to know, he would have to become a scholar of the sea, then one day, he would set off to find her.  He  would  take  his  raft  and  float  away  on  it,  searching, searching, until the moment their eyes met. or until it sank. The  island  home  was,  give  or  take,  a  kilometre  in  length  after the  final  unhinging  of  those  parts  which,  after  bidding  Adios!, violently  crashed  to  the  ocean  floor.  Flocks  of  birds  came  and went  on  their  seasonal  migrations.  They  seemed  to  accept  the drifting structure as a new land. The  nests  they  constructed  with  the  bones  of  dead  fish  and droppings eventually covered the entire surface in a thick fertilising habitat,  where  over  time,  astonishing  plants  grew  in  profusion. Bobbing coconuts took root and grew into magnificent palm trees. Seedlings  of  mangrove,  pandanus  and  coastal  dune  grasses  came with  the  tides,  other  plants  blew  on  board  as  seed,  and  none withered away. A swarm of bees arrived, as did other insects, and stayed. All manner of life marooned in this place would sprout to vegetate  the  wreckage.  A  peanut  that  had  floated  for  perhaps  a decade landed one day and grew so profusely it became a tangle of vine-like  stems  reaching  out  over  the  surface  to  find  crevices  in which to sink. A single rotting tomato containing an earthworm settled in the newspaper-lined base of a plywood fruit box, and grew. Within a season,  tomato  plants  inhabited  the  island  like  weeds.  The  worm multiplied  into  hundreds  and  thousands  of  worms.  The  worms spread  like  wildfire  into  every  pokey  hole  of  rotting  rubbish  and soon  enough,  a  deep,  nutrient-rich  humus  covered  the  entire island.  Well!  What  have  you?  Peach,  apricot,  almonds,  all  grew. Guava, figs – fruit that came with the birds, stayed, and grew into beautiful  trees.  A  wasted  banana  root  survived  for  months  in  the sea until it settled on the island where it sent up one big fat shoot after another, in between a mango tree and the figs, then drooped with the weight of large bunches of fruit. So! did  Will  notice?  Was  he  happy?  Yes,  he  was.  He  was  a practical man in a practical man’s paradise. He had food, shelter, and his catchments of fresh water were always full to the brim. He grew  strong  and  healthy  pursuing  his  numerous  daily  tasks.  His mind  grew  with  the  information  he  stored  inside  his  brain. unflinchingly, he ordered the patterns of water beneath him. daily his mind sifted the information. He was able to recall each day he had been at sea, from the time he began living on the island. He developed a keen eye for the movement of the stars, staying awake to  sing  the  Fishman’s  ceremonial  song  cycles  all  night,  from  the raising  of  the  star  across  the  eastern  horizon  to  the  setting  of the  big maliwi star in the west. Then he would sleep. These were the rhythms of his life which he lived through like lines of poetry. When  the  rhythm  changed  with  the  seasons,  he  would  stop measuring star movements for the current flow, or move through endless  days  of  charting  the  flight  of  birds.  Then,  like  these changing rhythms, he would switch the activities of his daily life. Sometimes, he would concentrate solely on the measurements he kept of the many species of trees on board, his vegetable stock and other  vegetation,  such  as  grass,  flowers,  weeds.  After  he  had completed  his  measurements,  he  would  spend  the  remaining hours  of  the  day  working  on  the  boat  he  was  building,  out  of found objects, salvaged timber, on top of a raft, the place where he lived. Inside  this  roped,  nailed  and  wired  structure,  he  kept  his precious possessions which he had accumulated from his salvage operations, tunnelling down into the depths of the pontoon island itself.  Inside  his  shelter,  he  had  stored  fishing  lines  which  had taken  him  hours,  and  sometimes  many  days  to  untangle;  little boxes  of  precious  hooks,  nails,  tools  he  had  made  himself;  and dried foods under sheets of plastic. His worst nightmare when he spent the first night on the birthing wreck was how to save himself if the pontoon disintegrated. Now he was able to reign safe in the knowledge that the raft he had made himself was ready, in case of any emergency, which would force him to vacate the island. In his little world he cooked sometimes on bits of salvaged iron while being careful not to use up his precious supply of driftwood, a mountain of it already stored, even while driftwood was plentiful. everything  was  bountiful.  If  he  went  looking  for  driftwood,  his hand only had to reach down into the shallow water and as though a magical spell had been cast, the treasure would be his to hold. His thoughts were wishes granted to the island. Any fear had a reality too,  but  Will  was  too  preoccupied  with  surviving  in  those  early months to become fearful. He lived on hope, little things such as food and water, simply to keep himself alive. Those were the golden days, when he could visualise himself, almost  ready  and  able,  almost  setting  sail  as  soon  as  his  boat  was ready. He lived on wishes for a very long time. He taught himself through  his  many  routines  of  measuring  how  to  navigate  the seasonal currents, but then it occurred to him, that the movement of the currents was only taking him in a circle far out to sea. The skies had been telling him this for months, but he was stupid after all, because he had refused to see. He only had himself to blame but who would have thought his faithful patterns could change, and begin to contradict each other. Instead of rationalising the changing reality he was confronted by, he  doggedly  continued  measuring  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  stars. even  the  moon  affirmed  his  now-monumental  suspicion  that  his island home had been caught in a sphere of oscillating winds and currents.  The  question  now  was  how  would  he  ever  return?  He had no certain answer. one day a huge green turtle tried to pull its heavy body onto his island. He killed it while it was still struggling to come aboard and he ate from its body. Afterwards, he thought the only certainly he had in life was the ghost boat mooring at night in his dreams. More and more frequently the green boat invaded his  sleep. eventually,  it  came  by  every  night  and  he  would  be awakened  with  the  ringing  of  a  fog  bell,  always  heralding  the arrival  of  the  ghost  boat  from  afar,  in  familiar  and  unfamiliar landings. Alas! In these dreams he saw himself as the eternal watchman, on  guard,  waiting  for  the  little  vessel  to  materialise  through  the darkness. He listened to the oars breaking the water and creaking in the oar rings. He waited, even though he knew what to expect, when  out  of  the  darkness  the  empty  boat  glided  in  to  land.  The repetitiveness of the dream frightened him into believing it to be true. There were occasions when he was so sure he had heard the ghost  of  the  green  boat  calling  by,  that  he  went  searching  the shoreline  of  his  island  in  the  moonlight.  His  attempts  were  futile but  that  did  not  wipe  the  elusive  vision  from  his  mind,  and  he longed for its arrival in his dreams as though it was his only reason for living. every night it was the same. dreading sleep, but overcome by deprivation, he would dream again of the green boat, which never landed  when  he  went  looking  for  it.  Will  grew  suspicious  of  the dream. For the life of him, he could not comprehend why anything could  be  so  close  and  not  close  enough. real!  But  never  real enough? He searched high and low for a malingerer on board his island. down in the wet cavities of the wreckage he prowled looking for  whoever,  or  whatever  sorcery  was  tricking  him  to  fret  for  his unreachable  goal.  The  search  became  his  main  occupation.  He completely forgot the chronicles written in his mind. Instead, eager to put an end to the mystery of the green boat, he searched everything just in case his dream had misled him. He was  a  man  who  needed  more  prayers  than  a  million  Christians could pray. There was a list a mile long of mysteries to be solved now before he could even dream of leaving the island. So, what if the  passenger  on  the  green  boat  had  landed  and  was  hiding somewhere  on  his  island? one  day,  he  decided  to  perform  a funeral  service  for  the  unconsecrated  souls  he  believed  were imprisoned somewhere below in the hope of finally laying them to rest.  He  improvised  on  bits  and  pieces  of  memory  from  church services he had been to in desperance, but that night in his sleep he heard the night bell ring as clear as day and when he searched the  darkness,  the  green  boat  slid  in  to  land,  and  when  it  did  not fade away, and he was able to pull it in by hand, he saw the boat was empty. So, melancholy  started  to  grow  in  the  island’s  rich  fertile atmosphere and competed for life just like any other seed planted on the island. In time, Will’s gloom grew increasingly morose with ideas  of  space.  The  distances  began  to  multiply  into  improbable journeys. Travel? How could he travel? His mind ran wild with the question until he got to the stage where it was almost inconceivable to contemplate his journey back to the Gulf of Carpentaria. He felt stranded  and  claustrophobic. even  though  the  island  shone brightly with happiness and blooming, he never noticed anymore. He shunned its solitude as a prisoner grown old with incarceration. He longed to be in a better place, elsewhere. days were now spent looking  longingly  at  the  sea  to  the  west. other  places  grew  more fabulous in his mind, while the island became a dungeon. one day while sitting seaward and looking towards the western horizon,  he  began  to  muse  over  his  future.  With  his  happiness destroyed,  he  now  viewed  the  island  as  a  temporary  structure which would break apart in the first storm. He sincerely believed that the total destruction of the island was only a matter of time. Will  Phantom’s  days  had  turned  bleak  and  his  routines  became perfunctory efforts performed with little care. All of his former hard work in building the boat became gaunt, repetitive  checks  for  structural  weaknesses.  He  became  possessed with  the  idea  that  the  boat  was  unseaworthy.  He  had  already decided  the  journey  was  an  impossibility.  At  four  o’clock  in  the morning he would wake up terrified when he saw himself, in a boat full  of  holes  and  the  water  gushing  in,  as  though  it  had  been constructed with straw. The  night  on  his  island  turned  out  to  be  an  extraordinarily masterful playwright, anxious for Will to fall asleep, impatient for the blood red curtains of his mind to burst open. Another grand play, another brand-new scenario of horror. This gifted corner of Will’s  mind  was  a  wizard.  A  genius  able  to  conjure  up  his innermost fears, as quick as a magician could take a rabbit from a hat. In the end, Will believed his nightmares would kill him. He decided  he  would  avoid  sleep  altogether.  He  would  become  a master in undoing any act of sorcery against him. He set to work on  his  plan.  Nail  after  nail  began  to  fall  out  of  its  hole  at  the slightest touch on his boat. As he held each nail in his fingers and examined it, it would snap into rusted flakes the moment the least bit of pressure was applied to it. Looking at the pile of rust he had gathered,  he  realised  he  was  doomed  to  a  hermit’s  life  on  the island.  He  confirmed  his  fate  when  he  started  checking  the joinery.  The  wire  binding  he  had  so  meticulously  woven  at  the joins,  now  also  disintegrated,  and  all  that  was  left  underneath were trace-mark stains of rust. He strove on until he eventually found what he feared would most stop him from ever leaving the island. The timber, piece by piece  of  his  beautiful,  almost  seaworthy  creation  was  crumbling apart  with  white  ants.  Could  you  believe  it?  Where  did  these mongrels  come  from?  Will  Phantom  plundered  the  island  for white  ants.  He  dug  like  a  ferret  with  his  bare  hands  until  blood poured from his fingers: until he proved the island itself would crumble  with  termites.  A  dream  come  true!  More  or  less  a nightmare. This nightmare saw the island fall to the bottom of the ocean  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning.  He  sat  around  relying  on the  idea  of  being  saved. others  would  save  him  he  believed. There was a relentlessness in his belief in salvation. of  all the bits and  pieces  of  uncharted  land  or  floating  objects  that  nobody cared about in the world’s ocean, he wished his would be found. He sat forever scanning the horizons for ships passing on the high seas. Sure enough, in days and months, many ships and boats appeared.  He  saw  passing  container  ships  laden  with  ballast  and others returning heavy with ore. each ploughed through the high seas on its own charted highway, all equally oblivious to his floating piece  of  rubbish.  His  dim,  life-wearied  eyes  saw  passing  pirate ships  and  boats  trading  in  human  traffic. desperate  boat  people crowded these nightmarish vessels but they were not interested in looking at wreckage as they passed by so close he could see their eyes scanning. They only had eyes for a safer place from wherever they had come. He saw  faces  scarred  by  the  knives  carried  in  the  hands  of pirates who stood in front of the half-clothed and naked, slashed wretchedness of victims they had imprisoned. Wherever they were to  be  jettisoned,  no  one  in  all  likelihood  regarded  his  island  of wreckage as a place for them to go. Watching them pass by he felt asphyxiated, as though there was not enough air in the atmosphere for  all  of  them  to  share.  Through  their  vacant  eyes  he  saw  a kaleidoscope of  nightmares.  Could  he,  or  could  they,  believe  all nightmares belonged to him? on  these  occasions,  the  spirits  of  the  people  returned  in dreams,  breaking  waves  in  their  ghostly  boats,  through  images which grew more distorted, as though the island was surrounded by the mirrors of a travelling sideshow, and it was not until these victims  of  catastrophe  were  falling  upon  him  that  he  recognised their fate. He was told they were dead people on their way to hell. Was  this  hell?  Was  this  hell?  He  screamed  out  in  such  dreadful fright when he woke up from these dreams, longing and crying for the eyes without hope to disappear forever. The salvation  he  awaited  was  a  stranger’s  voice.  A  sailor, fisherman, or coastal surveillance officer shouting, ‘Ahoy! Land oy.’ And he? He saw himself running for what was left of his stockpile of  salvaged  clothing  rotting  in  the  high  humidity,  and  putting something on to make himself decent for his rescue. What could be other  wise? The plan of his rescue had been rehearsed in repetitive, alternating visions of the preferred future. oh! How he would run up and down the shoreline, waving his arms, shouting, See me! See me!   And  thinking,  for  it  crossed  his  mind:  What  would  he  be? What would the discoverers call the sole inhabitant on his sinking oasis: a native? But the only real discovery being made was by the flocks of seagulls, settling in greater numbers each day, until they reached vast proportions, taking over every nook and cranny on his floating island of junk. 
Far out at sea in gentle swells, a catboat lolled through forty days and nights of good fortune, while the wise man,  Norm  Phantom,  steered  the  rudder  and  never slept.  He  spurned  the  night’s  call  for  men  to  drift  away into the arms of a merciful sleep. All the lucky countrymen on dry land slept soundly in their  whatjamajigs:  far  away  from  the  old  town  of desperance  on  their  bits  of  dog-chewed  foam,  which  flew  them around at night to any place in the world they wanted, cheap – for free. rain-sodden blankets  rolled  dirt-poor  old  people  on  the ground. In your dreams, if you thought they were going back to desperance  again.  They  were  not  like  Norm  Phantom,  losing  so much sleep in the process to get there as quick as he could. Lucky dreams leave behind asphyxiation and pneumonic coughs, hunger and  the  rest  of  it.  They  were  skidding  through  twilight  along  a moonbeam’s  golden  gleam,  or  a  star’s  silvery  reflection,  into  the dreamworld deep under the black ocean of time to fall home on a fossilised,  ancient,  primeval  lake  in  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria.  If people thought about things like this all day it might cause one hell of a fight about land and all kinds of things. Very  different  indeed  for  Norm  rowing  over  the  shadowy surface  where  sleeping  men  sunk  into  deadly  illusions.  Not  him though. He could last forty days and nights without a wink of sleep. His eyelids were not half hooded as they were during the day when the sun would beat straight down on the little green boat struggling along  with  a  breeze  in  the  sail  that  might  have  been  blown  by  a mouse.  At  night  his  eyes  popped  open,  becoming  wide-awake saucers like a nocturnal owl, if you noticed him sitting out there in the sea, on the cross bench of that bit of a boat, watching the stars, navigating the way home. The amazing thing was, on the fortieth night at sea, Norm was so close to his stranded son Will Phantom, it was a wonder he had not seen him. only four kilometres west of Will’s sinking flotation. Yet, who could quibble with distance? An inch is an inch on a ruler though  it  measured  forty  or  four  kilometres,  whichever  way  you looked at it. Norm did not sail merrily along to his prescribed destiny, nor fortunately, feel aghast with being lost. These were waters foreign to him but he felt comfortable, just as if he was at home with the brightly lit stars above him. Quietly, he sailed, because he was a quiet person, routinely occupying himself with whatever he had done  every  night  of  many,  many  years  of  his  life  when  he communicated  with  the  night  sky  travelling  east  to  west,  across the celestial sphere. The bright  Southern  Cross  which  had  long  ago  abandoned Jerusalem,  now  sat  low  above  the  horizon  to  the  west.  Having  a mind for the memory of all names, Norm also knew the formation as Crux Australis, whose brightest stars bridged a waterhole where a giant rock cod lives, a dark patch in the sky known as the Coal Sack.  He  then  looked  across  and  saw delta  and  Gramma  Crucis, the Pointers – Alpha  and Beta Centauri. elias must have been close by,  because  Norm  felt  as  though  he  was  up  in  these  heavens, travelling  with  them.  He  looked  at Kudawedangire   –  Pleiades,  or the  Seven  Sisters.  Yes, orion  –  the  hunter  was  there,  already starting  to  appear  in  the  eastern  horizon.  He  also  instantly recognised  the  slant  in  the  line  of  three  stars  of  the  Saucepan which  he  knew  spills  the  rain  in  January. earlier,  he  watched orion’s killer Scorpio prowling around in the western sky. Soon, soon, he said to himself, knowing when he could clearly see the hunter’s two dogs, the big canine and the little Canis Minor, he would know he should have reached desperance a long time ago. But, it was visible crossing inside of Sagittarius, where he saw the planet Mars, and he talked to the constellation about how pleased he had been with the mild-flowing currents. occasionally, he would look down at Hope who was sleeping on the  deck  boards.  Although  she  slept  fitfully,  she  had  not  moved since  the  planet  Venus  rose  in  the  evening  sky.  With  her  head down, looking in the bowels of the boat lest there were reflections on the water, she said she could not look at yidimil . Norm believed she must have told a different version of this same story a million times to Bala. He could not look at the evening star or any jinkiji . rubbish! What  a  load  of  bullshit.  Where  did  you  hear  that  from girl?  Ah!  Cock  and  bull  story. every  word  she  spoke  could  have come out of old Joseph’s lying mouth. ever heard that old imposter say  a  truthful  word? oh!  How  Norm  Phantom  wished  he  could glue  that  mouth  shut.  Who  would  believe  anything  Joseph Midnight had to tell anybody? eh! Good job! Save the peace. Let her sleep. If she was afraid of the evening star, Norm quickly discovered, she  was  afraid  of  the  morning  star  as  well.  When  she  woke  up before dawn, without fail, she looked east until the star set in the west. ‘Hey! Look at that over there,’ he would exclaim, pretending to see something in the direction of the star, but she would appear not to hear him. She again  told  him  she  only  talked  of  truths,  such  as  there being a death in the marriage if someone looked at this star. ‘J’sus! Well! I’ll be,’ he teased, encouraging her to argue some more with him. What had occurred to Norm was how her beliefs, so different to his own, were so tied into cause and effect. In her defence she listed every death of a spouse she had ever known. People die. It was not unusual. ‘Yeah, what about so and so, didn’t he die?’ And another, so on and so forth. ‘So, how can you tell someone looked at the stars?’ he would ask out of interest. The script was important to Norm Phantom. While he sought change he wanted her answer not to change. She would say of course you could tell because she had been told that was what happened. ‘I suppose ya old grandfather told you that, eh?’ Yes, that’s right. Good! Norm Phantom loved the wall. even so, he was surprised to discover how afraid of the sea she was. He had never seen a person so frightened of sea water. on   the  first  night  after  they  had  left  the  island,  from  the moment the air grew cooler on the skin with the onset of dusk, she had become more and more silent. She said the coolness in the  night  air  was  like  dead  people  touching  her.  He  watched each night while she would try to cover herself and Bala with a piece of canvas that she used for shade in the day. The little boy twisted and turned restlessly all night long while she continued reorganising  their  cover.  Her  nocturnal  hiding  ended  when finally,  the  morning  star  went  down  to  the  sea  in  the  western horizon. No heart  and  no  patience  with  any  of  her  imaginings,  Norm told her to keep her wild thoughts to herself. She said she would. It  was  her  problem.  She  said  she  knew  it  was  her  problem. did anyone ask him to interfere in her problem? They needed to save themselves  first.  ‘We  are  not  fish,  you  know.’  She  said  she  knew they were not fish. ‘I am not a simpleton.’ Norm said nothing. He had  no  need  to  speculate  about  the  genes  of  the  Midnight  clan. ‘You are a good boy Bala,’ he called. Throughout  those  mild  nights  on  their  journey  back  to desperance,  while  all  Hope  dreamt  of  was  to  be  reunited  with Will,  Norm  used  the  advantage  of  clear  skies  to  practice  his astronomical calculations. Sitting in the quietness of the night, he would use his fingers at arms-length level with the horizon in front of his eyes to calculate fractions of movement in the daily change of his guiding stars. This was the only way he was able to affirm his calculations  for  the  distance  of  their  journey.  But  she  refused  to look  up  to  the  night  sky,  saying  she  was  frightened,  in  case someone might die. He had drawn many maps of the skies in the sand for Bala and tested him with questions every day before their departure.  Whenever  he  looked  at  Hope  he  felt  annoyed  at  her pig-headed  beliefs.  He  knew  if  anything  should  happen  to  him, Hope would not be able to finish their journey. She would change course and head for the wilderness in the ocean looking for Will. He  only  hoped  one  thing.  When  she  killed  herself  with  her father’s stories, and if Bala had not perished along with her, the boy would remember what to do to survive. Quite often in the night at sea she cried in her sleep. distracted, he would look down at his daughter-in-law, sigh, and say – ‘Quiet now . ’  Then,  before  continuing  his  nocturnal  preoccupation  with measurements,  he  checked  the  child  had  not  been  woken.  She huddled  the  child  like  a  frightened  pup  from  nightfall.  Her  face vulnerable.  She  was  the  first  person  from  the  other  side  Norm Phantom had a chance to look at this close since his eyeballing days with her grandfather, Joseph Midnight. Vulnerability, the delicate, girlish face of the enemy. Never singular. Plural. And all he had left. The weak enemy was no explanation of how this girl who could cry all  day  long  had  somehow  survived  the  sea.  Alas!  Norm,  do  not search your mind again, for however she had come to be alive at all comes to naught against your parallels. Stay blinded. She possessed a  razor-sharp  mind  for  others  to  see.  Sandstorms  blew  inside  his head, to which she was oblivious. unfettered by old men’s thoughts, she huddled her son. The boy who too did not look into the sky. Who  would  if  he  saw  his  mother  fall  from  the  sky  and  disappear into the sea. When they  found  her  after  the  cyclone,  walking  through  a mountain  of  rubble  and  bubble  of  foam  that  lined  the  beach, she  claimed  nothing  of  the  sort  of  falling  from  the  sky  had  ever happened to her. She said she was just out, having a bit of a walk. She said she had no memory of ever falling anywhere and on that first encounter, she had even turned around, and started accusing Norm  of  coming  onto  the  island  uninvited  as  soon  as  she  had turned her back for five minutes. Nevermind that  she  could  not  discount  five  days  of  absence because she said, she knew what she was doing. ‘What was that?’ he asked, wondering what on earth was wrong with her. She eyed him with Joseph Midnight’s eyes. She said that he was trying to steal her son  away  right  under  her  nose.  ‘I  know  you  are  playing  around with  his  mind  with  all  that  mumbo  jumbo  stuff.’ Nobody  would survive if they fell out of the sky? He laughed and called her an idiot. She laughed  at  Norm’s  questioning  like  any  normal  person would,  with  a  perplexed  look  naturally  spread  on  her  face,  and because he was Norm Phantom, used to getting his own way, the more  he  questioned  her,  the  more  she  tried  to  act  normal.  He became even more suspicious of her. So! A monster. This was what a low-life like Midnight produced. She raised her shoulders at him then  hunched  them  together.  Having  thought  of  a  new  line  of attack,  she  said  she  knew  what  was  happening:  he  was  trying  to demonise her by connecting her to the spirit world of the sea. She said she felt frightened of him. So, she went away, camping in the rubble  at  night  along  the  beach,  where  she  stayed,  sulking  until things  settled  between  them.  Gradually,  as  the  king  tides  began eroding  the  rubble  that  contained  the  pieces  to  fit  the  jigsaw  of their  salvation,  she  started  to  help  Norm  to  salvage  whatever  he required to rebuild the green boat. No  great conversation of how, why, and so forth flowed between them since neither needed to speak to the other while they worked. The grey shale, granite calcite, embedded in the island energised them  to  toil  like  demons  on  Norm’s  wrecked  green  boat.  But questions sprung out of the natural geology. Would they sail back to desperance so that each could return to their respective sides of town?  The  more  Norm  slapped  and  banged  the  boat  into  shape, the more his mind became possessed by the mystery of how Hope did not die at sea. even if she had fallen from the sky, no normal person (which she was) could survive in the dangerous Gulf waters for very long. ‘Wasn’t that true, dad?’ she mused, childlike to the core. did anyone hear that? Liberties found new meaning outside of desperance.  The  more  they  became  acquainted,  the  more carefully  he  posed  his  questions  to  her,  and  the  more  her  words danced  back,  with  a  lot  of  liberties  too.  Finally,  one  day,  Norm could not stand it anymore. His nostrils flared with hot air and he snapped at her : ‘How would I know anything? Me! I only got my education from reading the Christian Bible.’ Had he heard anyone giving her permission to step inside his family? eh! Well! For all it mattered, he thought the girl was stupid. He had tried to awaken her earlier in the night to show her the phosphorescence lighting the water. Another good sign to be in the presence of the ancestral serpent. What did you do that for? She clung to the inside  of  the  boat  believing  any  minute  that  the  boat  would  be overturned and they would drown. He had to tell her it had gone away and eventually she became calm. He told himself he had to acknowledge  that  the  girl  was  petrified  of  water  and  would very likely make his grandson afraid of water. So, without much contemplation  over  the  matter,  or  bothering  to  consult  her,  he decided he would take Bala and look after him. The boy would not be  left  to  live  with  simpletons. other  people  could  live  alongside their  chitchat  if  they  wanted  to  and  be  blinded  forever  with  stuff like  that.  He  glanced  past  Hope  and  realised  he  still  felt  mighty angry  all  the  same  with  whatnot  now,  with  a  child  involved. ‘Whatnot got a mad wife because he can’t see straight.’ He hissed under his breath at the expanse of ocean, as though he was talking to his son. ‘Whatnot while I am alive I own my blood.’ one time, weeks before the sea journey, while they worked on the all-consuming, energy-draining reconstruction of the boat, he told  her  finally,  ‘You’d  be  flat  out  remembering  what  happened yesterday  let  alone  what  happened  days  before.’  Again,  she taunted, parroting his own words: if you please how could anyone come walking  out  of  the  sea? He  never  mentioned  it  again,  because suddenly he thought of elias watching him and it dawned on him, there and then on that strange beach of rubbish that rattled when the  water  rushed  through  it  at  high  tide,  that  possibly  a  guiding hand  was  manipulating  the  strings,  and  they  were  nothing  more than puppets. Someone blew the words out of their mouths. Some hand coalescing his mind created this unwanted episode in his life. He stared into that moving mouth, squinting with the glare of the sun,  staring  at  that  grotesque,  talking  doll  who  had  words  that flowed like a river. But  he  knew  if  they  were  to  leave  the  island,  work  must continue and they had to do it together. First he ignored her when she claimed that the boat was hers since she found it on her island. Then,  just  to  break  the  monotonous  chatter,  he  asked  her  if  she believed in the Bible. She said: ‘No, naturally, I don’t believe in all of that whitefella stuff.’ He told her he believed in the Bible because the white people had prospered by believing in what the Bible had told them. ‘You remember the story about the sea parting for the people  to  walk  through  it?  No? of  course  you  people  wouldn’t know that story either, I suppose, because you people talk, talk, talk and you learn nothing. ‘ The sea could part and a man could walk on water.’ What was more, he told her before she was even born, his own two good eyes actually saw the phenomenon explained in the white man’s Bible. ‘I was  walking  if  you  please,  straight  out  of  a  world  that belonged to marine creatures and what have you swimming about in sea water, who had made enemies of men in the history of the dreamtime. But, that wouldn’t happen to you because you do not know  these  stories.  God  don’t  make  miracles  happen  for  people with bad blood filtering through their veins.’ She asked why he thought that, and he said it was because he knew  blood  like  anything,  just  like  a  forensic  scientist.  She  had certain behaviour which was from having bad blood. The truth of the matter was that Norm believed someone like Joseph Midnight did  not  have  real  blood.  It  was  gammon  blood.  Thin  blood.  The kind  of  weak  blood  which  could  not  tell  fortunes,  or  make predictions  about  the  future,  and  could  not  have  premonitions such as if someone was dead or alive, calling out for people to go and  find  them.  So,  all  that  was  not  thick  blood.  Thin  blood  was uncomfortable on the sea. Having had all the time in the world to study  what  he  was  talking  about,  he  told  her  he  was  thankful  to God for this opportunity to justify his beliefs. He said he reckoned the Almighty had only put bad blood in a mangy dog to handicap it in life so it could not do anything to save itself from living worse than  a  dog.  Fuming,  she  said  nothing.  She  just  chucked  a  few things around instead. He said if it was God’s will, he would have to listen to her talk her mad talk until the cows came home, and he reckoned it was the devil’s lingo that goes on talking shit, non-stop. under the circumstances Norm Phantom thought he ignored her the  best  he  could,  but  understand:  he  had  a  predicament  to overcome and needed her help. Mad talk, was what Norm called her while he worked. Listening to  her  hurrying  him  along  all  day  long  so  she  could  go  and  find Will: ‘Whatever happened to Will, we’s got to go quickly and find him.’ He was sick and tired of hearing her. He had to think about his own sanity too or he would go mad, so he pretended she did not exist. She begged him to listen to her and she began to have illusions – claiming to be possessed of dreams where she saw Will standing  in  the  distance,  trying  to  reach  them.  Then  she  would retell the dream, every detail caressed and described, until hours would  slip  by  and  the  dream  would  still  be  there  scraping  at nothing and shooting up through the old man’s nostrils like sand, suffocating him, flowing through him like boiling water, until he, unable to stand it any longer, dropped his tools and hurried away. She  would  cry  all  day  long  that  she  had  seen  the  white  wash  of Will’s junk pile island floating further away. Norm said he had not heard  of  anything  like  it  and  he  believed  he  had  heard  a  lot  of things in his lifetime about things you find on the sea. Things a girl like  her  would  never  even  be  able  to  dream  up.  ‘No,’  he  said,  ‘I never seen a thing like that before and I don’t suppose I am ever going to either.’ What surprised him even more was how she could describe the floating island in every last detail as though she had been involved in  its  construction.  Piece  by  piece,  she  was  able  to  describe  the angle, position and degree of measurement in the pile of junk, like a carpenter. She told him of the pieces that came from buildings in desperance which were wedged into the island. even bits from his own  home  she  described  and  he  became  annoyed  with  her  crazy ideas that the town was gone. When did that happen? She said she saw dead people trapped inside the island as well. It was a strange story which mystified Norm. Sometimes the waves rolling onto the beach spill their stories right at your feet. But she did not have one dream to explain whether she had fallen from the sky or not. He could  not  let  her  fool  his  judgement.  This  strange  dream  was  to entice him to go looking for Will. She was off her head. He would not let himself be enticed by her. Intrigue will not get you anywhere and Norm knew he had the boat to finish working on. He doggedly worked on regardless, so they could be where they were now. So on and so forth. It ended with Norm, Hope and the grandchild well  inside  their  voyage,  journeying  with  lee  tides,  on  a  route plotted through the Milky Way sky. Since she was constantly in his face,  it  felt  different  to  travelling  alone  for  Norm  Phantom,  who never cared for company at sea, except one or two he claimed, but he was blowed if he could trust other people. How she niggled him but what choice did he have? He was no stranger to vigilance and with so much ample time to spare with this extra burden to bear, he  immersed  himself  in  a  ridiculous-looking  search  for  any  clue whatsoever  that  would  prove  there  and  then,  that  there  was  a clandestine  presence  on  board  trying  to  do  away  with  him. remember you do not always see what you seek. In many ways it was a terrible journey. After the ninety-ninth time he had torn the boat and its contents apart in his mind in the course of a day, he told himself to be patient. Never give up! That was the spirit of the man. While it was not clear as day, Norm truly believed  there  was  someone  else  on  board  who  could  possibly  be Joseph  Midnight  chasing  his  own  blood;  stranger  things  were known to happen. He told her how somebody could downsize to the tiniest reminder of himself, as any enemy worth his salt would: oh! Yes! Laughing his head off inside a matchbox or whatever. He had heard about these things, but she said it was news to her. ‘What did you bring on board with you?’ he would ask Hope a hundred times a day, and receive the same answer if she was in the mood to speak. ‘I told you I brought nothing with me and I aren’t going to tell you  again,’  she  would  snap  at  him  in  her  rediscovered  vicious sharp tongue when it suited her. She told him to stop talking to her. She said she could not be bothered listening to his silly stories anymore. Well! He did shut his mouth but it did not mean he let the feeling he had in his guts go to rot. His mind raced around like a fast car and it was telling him one, two, three: they might never reach desperance if he was not careful. So, he watched her sleep on her secrets and hoped his God would hand him a key. But miracles did not automatically happen to anyone unless they already had the key. elias was a miracle. He had walked out of the sea. But how could she have fallen out of the sky?  He  could  tell  she  was  no  miracle  and  he  would  tell  that  to anyone. Someone had given her a key. Ah!  Bala!  Mellowing  at  the  thought,  he  looked  down  at  his sleeping grandson with his skinny limbs tucked around him like a  ball.  There,  he  only  saw  the  country  of  sea  people,  yet  he realised that as the reality of biology would have it, the otherside was flowing side by side with Westside in that child. disadvantage and advantage: what could this bring? Very special care would be needed to keep an eye on this child. He  looked  through  the  darkness  of  the  sea  and,  saw  very clearly that Will was not going to be easy to find, no matter what Hope tried in her bag of tricks to lure him on in her search. In his  heart  of  hearts  he  knew  she  could  not  guide  him  to  Will because she did not come from the sea. He knew they could not sail on forever. There was no trust between them. The currents were changing and soon, the Wet season would bring the cyclones again and he felt certain, if this happened, who knows where they would end up. Back where they started? on  the other side of the world?  Would  they  become elias  in  reverse,  condemned  to  live the  remainder  of  their  lives  in  a  purgatory  of  revisiting,  duplica ting the wars of all the peoples through the ages of time? For  many  days  he  had  felt  a  jingling  of  hot  blood  running through his veins, and he recognised a sensation he knew already, of the sea dragging him towards home. He knew they were close now, and he felt it as though he was nearly there. Soon, soon, he kept  telling  himself,  riding  out  the  curse  in  his  gut.  And,  he waited,  watching  for  the  moment  when  the  star  of  the  giant  fish would disappear low over the sky, directly above desperance. This was the star that elias had been following for years until one fearful night, he lost his boat in a storm. The old mariner had called the star Fomalhaut ,  the  brightest  in  the  constellation  of  Piscis  Austrini which followed the water carrier’s jug of Aquarius. Norm knew it too  as  the  star  of  navigators,  or  the  Southern  Fish.  It  was  the groper who swam from the sea at certain times of the year to the sky and down again, falling back into the shallows of its groper’s hole. This was it. Ahead, just to the south…the fish sank. on  seeing the star sink into the sea, he pinpointed the location. Now he knew he was very close to land. He would navigate the coastline back to desperance in the morning. He dropped the sail, and relaxing for once,  he  waited  until  dawn.  In  this  utter  quietness  of  becalmed waters,  he  heard  the  distant  sounds  of  frogs  all  calling  together from the land. He listened more intently and was surprised how these amphibians could be heard so far out at sea. even though he remembered  how  densely  the  frogs  populated desperance,  it seemed to him as he listened more carefully, that there must have been  an  extraordinary  explosion  in  their  numbers  in  town  this year. Ah! The good rains, he thought. It seemed logical on that still night, sitting there at sea, that the breeze should carry their song to  him.  He  wondered  if  Sinbad  the  Sailor  had  returned  home voyage after voyage to such joy. So! Sweet was the song of frogs, he could not believe it was this sound he had missed most of all in the time he had been away. When he saw the first faint light silently rising at dawn, Norm scanned the sea to sight land to the south. What he finally saw was not what he was looking for. There was no sandbar. There were no mangroves.  Yonder  no  tree  country.  Through  the  red  light  of dawn, he saw the shores of a flattened landscape which the cyclone had left in its wake. Hope and Bala were now awake, and the three of  them  stared  at  the  low,  flat  mark  along  the  southern  horizon. Bala said it was a big, yellow snake. Hope said nothing. Norm told them they were very close to desperance. Hours later,  after  sailing  further  along  the  coastline,  he  was ready to bring the boat into land. The little tattered sail made of dried, salted shark skin caught a light breeze and quickly, the boat glided  through  the  water  towards  land.  Hope  and  Bala  stared ahead at a landscape which meant nothing to them. Being used to the stoical silence of the salt-hardened face of Norm, they did not expect  him  to  say  anything  about  the  wilderness  they  were approaching. Behind them, they did not see the look of caution on Norm’s face as he exercised great care with his right hand, steering the rudder. The surface  of  the  water  was  so  smooth,  it  felt  as  though  the boat was sliding over silk. Bala looked into the flowing seagrasses in the waters under the boat and when suddenly he saw the giant fish, he screamed with excitement. Norm looked over the side and both of them saw perhaps a hundred gropers swimming under the boat. The fish followed the boat through the deeper waters, until it hit  the  sand.  Norm  jumped  over  the  side  and  towed  the  boat through  the  mud  towards  the  high-tide  mark,  still  more  than  a kilometre away. With  the  boat  secured  on  the  wet  land,  Norm  stared  ahead, trying  to  survey  the  landscape  for  familiar  landmarks.  In  every direction he looked he could not discover one familiar feature of desperance. He turned to Hope and said absentmindedly, ‘Perhaps we  will  see  something  soon.’  For  one  moment,  he  had  thought Hope might be questioning his judgement by her silence. Could he be wrong? ‘No! No! This is right. I was right,’ he mumbled, still confident that he had navigated correctly. They were home. They  began  walking  on  the  empty  land.  Ahead,  there  was nothing. Norm watched the excitement on the small boy’s face as he ran wild, pleased to be safe on land, and shouting for all he was worth at all the frogs jumping out of his way. Hope looked at the flattened moonscape but did not show that she had one skerrick of interest  in  what  had  happened  to  the  town.  Norm  instinctively called  Bala  to  him  and  he  hoisted  him  on  his  shoulders,  then walked ahead, tramping through the watery clay mud, towards the invisible town. Somewhere, as  he  walked,  Norm  realised  he  could  only  hear his own feet slurping through the mud, and he knew that she was gone.  He  almost  paused,  almost  stopped  to  look  around,  but  he walked on. He wanted to call after her – demand she come back. Tell her she was stupid. He nearly let his temper fly. every muscle in  his  body  ordered  him  to  go  after  her  and  drag  her  back.  But each  time  he  turned  to  go  back,  he  was  blinded  by  the  sun.  The intensity  of  its  white  light  hitting  the  water,  reflected  back  in  his eyes as though a shield had been put up between him and Hope, forced him to turn back towards the land. unable  to  see  anything  except  a  blinding  darkness,  he  held Bala tightly on his shoulders and stumbled on away from the sea, until  the  moment  passed,  and  he  opened  his  eyes  into  a  reddish haze. He knew he could not interfere with other people’s dreams. He said nothing, not to upset Bala yet, and let her go. But he heard her fear, gasping for breath, running back to the boat. He heard the boat dragging through sand towards the outgoing tide. It was at this point he started to believe in her and even how a woebegotten people like the other side could rise above themselves with audacity to discover hope in their big empty souls. He smiled, knowing she was going to find Will before it was too late with that crazy map she had inside her head. She could go. The journey was hers  to  chart.  ‘Good  luck  to  you  girl,’  he  said  silently.  ‘You  bring him home.’ The red glowing waters around the boat began to swarm until the  boat  looked  as  though  it  was  being  propelled  on  the  back  of something  solid  through  the  water:  the  groper  fish  circling  the boat,  building  up  speed,  crossing  each  other  under  the  boat, picking the boat up and moving it back to sea through the surging flow of the changing tide. Hope rowed with all of her might with the outgoing tide. She was so blinded by her mission she did not see the gropers helping her. In his  heart,  Norm  knew  he  had  no  more  journeys  to  make. Well! Not for the moment. He continued walking ahead, down his memory  of  the  main  street  of desperance.  He  was  met  by  the bony, hollow-ribbed, abandoned dogs of the town that had run to the hills and back again after the cyclone. Now, having appeared from nowhere, they roamed along streets that no longer existed, searching for their owners. They did not bark or howl. The shock of  the  cyclone  had  left  them  like  this:  speechless,  dumbfounded, unable to crack a bark. unable to emit a sound out of their wideopened mouths. Hurling a string of abuse, Norm sent them back to their invisible yards where they sat miserably, waiting for him to go  away.  He  put  Bala  down  on  the  ground  and  they  walked towards Westside. ‘ one day,’ he said to the boy, ‘your Mum and dad are going to come and get you after the grass grows green, and when the clouds of grasshoppers have come and eaten the grass down and died  in  the  wintertime,  and  when  you  have  caught  one  big,  fat barramundi in the lagoon. Can you wait until then?’ The  boy  thought  about  all  of  these  eventualities,  where  the enigma of time sidestepped desire and ran away from dreams. His face lit into a smile as he looked up at the big man surveying the flood  plains.  All  dreams  come  true  somehow,  Norm  murmured, sizing up the flattened landscape, already planning the home he would rebuild on the same piece of land where his old house had been, among the spirits in the remains of the ghost town, where the snake slept underneath. ‘I reckon  we  will  go  home  then,’  he  said.  So,  they  walked  in mud away from the town left to the dogs that tried to howl for their owners.  Neither  spoke,  because  neither  would  have  heard  the other.  It  was  much  better  to  listen  to  the  mass  choir  of  frogs  – green, grey, speckled, striped, big and small, dozens of species all assembled around the two seafarers, as they walked. It was  a  mystery,  but  there  was  so  much  song  wafting  off  the watery  land,  singing  the  country  afresh  as  they  walked  hand  in hand out of town, down the road, Westside, to home.
